B D Chaurasia'S 
Late Dr B D Chaurasia 
1937-1985 
B D Chaurasia'S 
Fourth  Edition 
Late  Dr B D Chaurasia 
MBBS,  MS,  PhD,  FAMS 
Department  of Anatomy 
G.R.  Medical  College 
Gwalior,  India 
Edited  by 
Dr. Krishna  Garg 
MBBS,  MS,  PhD,  FIMSA,  FIAMS,  FAMS  & Chikitsa  Ratan 
Ex. Prof.  & Head,  Deptt.  of Anatomy, 
Lady  Hardinge  Medical  College,  New  Delhi 
CBS 
CBS PUBLISHERS  & DISTRIBUTORS  PVT.  LTD. 
NEW  DELHI  • BENGALURU  • PUNE  • KOCHI  • CHENNAI 
WWW.CBSPD.COM 
BD Chaurasia's 
Handbook  of 
GENERAL  ANATOMY 
Fourth  Edition 
ISBN:  978-81-239-1654-5 
Copyright  © Author  and  Publisher 
Fourth  Edition:  2009 
Reprint:  2010,  2011,2012,  2013 
First Edition:  1978 
Second  Edition:  1983 
Third  Edition:  1996 
All rights  reserved.  No part  of this book  may  be reproduced  or transmitted  in dny form 
or by any  means,  electronic  or mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or 
any information  storage  and  retrieval  system  without  permission,  in writing,  from  the 
author  and  the publisher. 
Published  by Satish  Kumar  Jain  for 
CBS Publishers  & Distributors  Pvt Ltd 
4819/XI  Prahlad  Street,  24 Ansari  Road,  Daryaganj,  New  Delhi  110002,  India. 
Ph: 23289259,  23266861,  23266867  Website: www.cbspd.com 
Fax: 011 -23243014  e-mail: delhi@cbspd.com : cbspubs@airtelmail.in . 
Corporate  Office:  204  FIE, Industrial  Area,  Patparganj,  Delhi  110092 
Ph: 4934  4934  Fax:  4934  4935  e-mail: publishing@cbspd.com ; publicity@cbspd.com 
Branche s 
• Bengaluru:  Seema  House  2975,  17th  Cross,  K.R.  Road, 
Banasankari  2nd  Stage,  Bengaluru  560 070,  Karnataka 
Ph:+91-80-26771678/79  Fax:+91-80-26771680  e-mail:  bangalorefflcbspd.com 
• Chennal:  20, West  Park  Road,  Shenoy  Nagar,  Chennai  600 030,  Tamil  Nadu 
Ph: +91-44-26260666,26208620  Fax:  +91-44-42032115  e-mail: chennal@cbspd.com 
• Kochi:  36/14  Kalluvilakam,  Lissie  Hospital  Road,  Kochi  682 018,  Kerala 
Ph:+91-484-4059061-65  Fax:+91-464-4059065  e-mail: kochl@cbspd.com 
• Mumbal:  83-C,  Dr E Moses  Road,  Worli,  Mumbai-400018,  Maharashtra 
Ph:+91-9833017933  e-mail: mumbdl@cbspd.com 
• Pune:  Bhuruk  Prestige,  Sr. No. 52/12/2+1  +3/2  Narhe,  Haveli 
(Near  Katraj-Dehu  Road  Bypass),  Pune  411 041,  Maharashtra 
Ph:+91-20-64704058,64704059,  32342277  Fax:+91-20-24300160  e-mall:  pune@cbsr  d.com 
Representative s 
• Hyderabad  0-9885175004  •  Kolkata  0-9831437309,0-9051152362 
• Nagpur  0-9021734563  •  Patna  0-9334159340 
Printed  at SDR  Printers,  Delhi-94  (India) 
Preface  to the Fourth  Edition 
I feel  a sense  of pride  and enthusiasm  in presenting  to you the fourth 
edition  of this  popular  book.  Now,  simple  coloured  diagrams 
extensively  illustrate  each  chapter.  Once  initial  interest  to read  text 
supplemented  by diagrams  is developed,  learning  general  anatomy  is 
hardly  problematic. 
Clinical  anatomy  has  been  illustrated  with  coloured  diagrams. 
Students  have  always  been  encouraging  me in improving  both  text 
and diagrams. 
The help  of Ms. Priya,  MBBS  student  of Lady  Hardinge  Medical 
College  during  1990-91,  is being  acknowledged  for improving  the 
"Anatomical  word  meanings  and historical  names." 
Mr. Ajit  Kumar,  first  year  student  of Banarasidas  Chandiwala 
Institute  of Physiotherapy  (BCIP)  2004-05,  gave  constructive 
suggestions  for its betterment.  Ms. Stuti  Malhotra,  first  year  student  of 
BCIP  (2007-08),  provided  me with  a number  of tables  in various 
chapters.  I feel highly  obliged  to them. 
The editor  is obliged  to Mr. Y.N.  Arjuna,  Publishing  Director,  CBS 
for timely  and  much  needed  guidance.  Page  layout  and  four  colour 
diagrams  work  have  been  diligently  done  by Ms.  Nishi  Verma  and 
Mr. Chand  Singh  Naagar  of M/s.  Limited  Colors. 
Mr. Vinod  Jain,  Production  Director,  and Mr. Satish  Jain,  Chairman, 
CBS  Publishers  and Distributors,  have  been  helping  me from  time  to 
time.  Comments  from  the students  are welcome. 
Krishna  Garg 
Editor 
dedicated 
to 
my teacher 
Shri Uma  Shankar  Nagayach 
Preface  to the First  Edition 
This handbook  of general  anatomy  has  been  written  to meet  the 
requirements  of students  who  are newly  admitted  to medical  colleges. 
It thoroughly  introduces  the greater  part  of medical  terminology,  as 
well as the various  structures  which  constitute  the human  body.  On 
account  of the late admissions  and the shorter  time  now  available  for 
teaching  anatomy,  the coverage  of general  anatomy  seems  to suffer 
maximum.  Since  it lays  down  the foundation  of the entire  subject  of 
medicine,  it was  felt  necessary  to produce  a short,  simple  and 
comprehensive  handbook  on this neglected,  though  important,  aspect 
of the subject.  It has been  written  in a simple  language,  with  the text 
classified  in small  parts  to make  it easier  for the students  to follow  and 
remember.  It is hoped  that  this will  prove  quite  useful  to the medical 
students. 
Gwalior 
November  1978 B D CHAURASIA 
Contents 
Preface  to the Fourth  Edition  v 
Preface  to the First  Edition  vii 
1. Introduction  1 
2. Skeleton  29 
3. Joints  57 
4. Muscles  83 
5. Cardiovascular  System  101 
6. Lymphatic  System  123 
7. Nervous  System  137 
8. Skin  and  Fasciae  171 
9. Connective  Tissue,  Ligaments  and  Raphe  195 
10. Principles  of Radiography  205 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names  213 
References  and  Suggestions  for  Additional  Reading  243 
Index  253 
Human  anatomy  is the science  which  deals  with  the structure  of the 
human  body.  The  term,  'anatomy',  is derived  from  a Greek  word, 
"anatome",  meaning  cutting  up. The  term  'dissection'  is a Latin 
equivalent  of the Greek  anatome.  However,  the two  words,  anatomy 
and dissection,  are not synonymous.  Dissection  is a mere  technique, 
whereas  anatomy  is a wide  field  of study. 
Anatomy  forms  firm  foundation  of the whole  art of medicine  and 
introduces  the student  to the greater  part  of medical  terminology. 
"Anatomy  is to physiology  as geography  is to history,  i.e. it describes 
the theatre  in which  the action  takes  place." 
SUBDIVISIONS  OF ANATOMY 
Initially,  anatomy  was  studied  mainly  by dissection.  But the scope  of 
modern  anatomy  has become  very  wide  because  it is now  studied  by 
all possible  techniques  which  can  enlarge  the boundaries  of the 
anatomical  knowledge. 
The main  subdivisions  of anatomy  are: 
1. Cadaveric  anatomy  is studied  on dead  embalmed  (preserved) 
bodies  usually  with  the naked  eye (macroscopic  or gross  anatomy). 
This can be done  by one of the two approaches:  (a) In 'regional 
anatomy'  the  body  is studied  in parts,  like the upper  limb,  lower 
limb,  thorax,  abdomen,  head  and neck,  and brain;  (b) in'systemic 
anatomy''  the body  is studied  in systems,  like the skeletal  system 
(osteology)  (Fig.  1.1),  muscular  system  (myology),  articulatory 
system  (arthrology  or syndesmology),  vascular  system  (angiology), 
nervous  system  (neurology),  and respiratory,  digestive,  urogenital 
and endocrine  systems  (splanchnology).  The  locomotor  system 
inr»1n/^oc  Actanlnm;  oftV»t-r\lr\rrw  onrl  m\/AlAm? 
2 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Fig. 1.1:  Skeletal  system 
2. Living  Anatomy  is studied  by inspection,  palpation  (Fig.  1.2), 
percussion,  auscultation,  endoscopy  (bronchoscopy,  gastroscopy), 
radiography,  electromyography,  etc. Vertebral  column Rib Skull 
Humerus 
Radius 
Ulna 
Hand 
Femur 
Fibula •Tibia 
.Foot 
Fig. 1.2:  Contracted  muscles  for palpation 
3. Embryology  (developmental  anatomy)  is the study  of the 
prenatal  developmental  changes  in an individual.  The 
developmental  history  is called  'ontogeny'.  The evolutionary  history 
on the other  hand,  is called  'phylogeny'. 
4. Histology  (microscopic  anatomy)  is the study  of structures 
with the aid of a microscope. 
5. Surface  anatomy  (topographic  anatomy)  is the study  of deeper 
parts  of the body  in relation  to the skin  surface.  It is helpful  in 
clinical  practice  and surgical  operations  (Fig.  1.3). 
6. Radiographic  and  imaging  anatomy  is the study  of the bones 
and deeper  organs  by plain  and  contrast  radiography  by ultra-
sound  and computerised  tomographic  (CT)  scans  (Fig.  1.4). Fig. 1.3:  Palpating  the  dorsalis  pedis  artery 
Fig. 1.4:  X-ray  of chest  (plain  radiograph) 
7. Comparative  anatomy  is the study  of anatomy  of the other 
animals  to explain  the changes  in form,  structure  and  function 
(morphology)  of different  parts  of the human  body. 
8. Physical  anthropology  deals  with  the external  features  and 
measurements  of different  races  and groups  of people,  and with 
the study  of the prehistoric  remains. 
Fig. 1.5:  Physical  anthropology 
9. Applied  anatomy  (clinical  anatomy)  deals  with  application  of 
the anatomical  knowledge  to the medical  and  surgical  practice 
(Fig.  1.6). 
10. Experimental  anatomy  is the study  of the factors  which  influence 
and determine  the form,  structure  and function  of different  parts 
of the body. 
11. Genetics  deals  with  the study  of information  present  in the 
chromosomes. 4 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Clavicle 
Lung 
Heart 
Introduction  I 5 
Fig. 1.6:  The  relation  of nerves  to the humerus  and  likelihood  of their 
injury  in case  of fracture 
HISTORY  OF ANATOMY 
1. Greek  Period  (B.C.) 
Hippocrates  of Cos  (circa  400  B.C.),  the 'Father  of Medicine',  is 
regarded  as one  of the founders  of anatomy.  Parts  of Hippocratic 
collection  are the earliest  anatomical  descriptions. 
Herophilus  of Chalcedon  (circa  300  B.C.)  is called  the "father  of 
anatomy".  He was a Greek  physician,  and was one of the first  to dissect 
the human  body.  He distinguished  cerebrum  from  cerebellum,  nerves 
from  tendons,  arteries  from  veins,  and the motor  from  sensory  nerves. 
He described  and named  the parts  of eye,  meninges,  torcular  Herophili, 
fourth  ventricle  with  calamus  scriptorius,  hyoid  bone,  duodenum,  prostate 
gland,  etc. We owe to him the first  description  of the lacteals.  Herophilus 
was a very  successful  teacher,  and wrote  a book  on anatomy,  A special 
treatise  of the eyes,  and  a popular  handbook  for midwives. Axillary 
- Radial 
Ulnar-
6 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
2. Roman  Period  (A.D.) 
Galen  of Pergamum,  Asia  Minor  (circa  130-200  A.D.),  the "prince  of 
physicians",  practised  medicine  at Rome.  He was  the foremost' 
practitioner  of his days  and  the first  experimental  physiologist.  He 
wrote  voluminously  and theorized  and  dogmatized  on many  medical 
subjects  like  anatomy,  physiology,  pathology,  symptomatology  and 
treatment.  He demonstrated  and  wrote  on anatomy  De anatomicis-
administrationibus.  His  teachings  were  followed  and  considered  as 
the infallible  authority  on the subject  for nearly  15 centuries. 
3. Fourteenth  Century 
Mundinus  or Mondino  d'Luzzi  (1276-1326),  the  'restorer  of 
anatomy',  was an Italian  anatomist  and professor  of anatomy  at Bologna. 
He wrote  a book  Anathomia  which  was  the standard  anatomical  text 
for over  a century.  He taught  anatomy  by dissection  for which  his text 
was used  as a guide.  He was  the most  renowned  anatomist  before 
Vesalius. 
4. Fifteenth  Century 
Leonardo  da Vinci  of Italy  (1452-1519),  the  originator  of 
cross-sectional  anatomy,  was  one  of the greatest  geniuses  the world 
has known.  He was  a master  of arts  and  contributed  substantially 
in mathematics,  science  and engineering.  He was the first  to describe 
the moderator  band  of the right  ventricle.  The  most  admirable  of his 
works  are the drawings  of the things  he observed  with  perfection  and 
fidelity.  His 60 notebooks  containing  500 diagrams  were  published  in 
1898. 
5. Sixteenth  Century 
Vesalius  (1514-1564),  the 'reformer  of anatomy',  was German  in origin, 
Belgian  (Brussels)  by birth,  and found  an Italian  (Padua)  university 
favourable  for his work.  He was  professor  of anatomy  at Padua.  He is 
regarded  as the founder  of modern  anatomy  because  he taught  that 
anatomy  could  be learnt  only  through  dissections.  He opposed  and 
corrected  the erroneous  concepts  of Galen  and  fought  against  his 
authority,  thus  reviving  anatomy  after  a deadlock  of about  15 centuries. 
His great  anatomical  treatise  De Febricia  Humani  Corporis,  written 
Introduction  I 7 
in seven  volumes,  revolutionized  the teaching  of anatomy  and remained 
as authoritative  text  for two centuries. 
Vesalius  studied  first  at Louvain  and  then  at Paris  under  Gunther 
and Sylvius.  Eustachius  was  the rival  of Vesalius.  The  followers  of 
Vesalius  included  Servetus,  Columbus,  Fallopius,  Varolio,  Vidius,  etc.; 
all of them  lived  during  16th  century. 
6. Seventeenth  Century 
William  Harvey  (1578-1657)  was  an English  physician  who 
discovered  the circulation  of blood,  and  published  it as Anatomical 
Exercise  on the Motion  of the Heart  and  Blood  in Animals.  He also 
published  a book  on embryology. 
The other  events  of this  century  included:  (a) the first  recorded 
human  dissection  in 1638  in Massachusetts;  (b) foundation  of 
microscopic  anatomy  by Malpighi;  and (c) introduction  of alcohol  as a 
preservative. 
7. Eighteenth  Century 
William  Hunter  (1718-1783)  was a London  anatomist  and obstetrician. 
He introduced  the present  day  embalming  with  the help  of Harvey's 
discovery,  and  founded  with  his younger  brother  (John  Hunter)  the 
famous  Hunterian  museum. 
8. Nineteenth  Century 
Dissection  by medical  students  was  made  compulsory  in Edinburgh 
(1826)  and Maryland  (1833).  Burke  and Hare  scandal  of 16 murders 
took place  in Edinburgh  in 1828.  Warburton  Anatomy  Act (1932)  was 
passed  in England  under  which  the unclaimed  bodies  were  made 
available  for  dissection.  The  'Act'  was  passed  in America 
(Massachusetts)  in 1831.  Formalin  was  used  as a fixative  in 1890s. 
X-rays  were  discovered  by Roentgen  in 1895.  Various  endoscopes 
were  devised  between  1819  and 1899.  The  anatomical  societies  were 
founded  in Germany  (1886),  Britain  (1887)  and America  (1888). 
The noted  anatomists  of this  century  include  Ashley  Cooper 
(1768-1841;  British  surgeon),  Cuvier  (1769-1832;  French  naturalist), 
Meckel  (1724-1774;  German  anatomist),  and Henry  Gray  (1827-1861; 
the author  of Gray's  Anatomy). 
8 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
9. Twentieth  Century 
The electron  microscope  was  invented  in 20th  century.  It was  applied 
in clinical  practice,  which  made  startling  changes  in the study  of normal 
and diseased  conditions.  Various  modifications  of electron  microscope, 
transmission  EM  and SEM,  etc. were  devised.  These  helped  in better 
understanding  of the body  tissues. 
Besides  plain  X-rays,  in this  century,  ultrasonography  and 
echocardiography  were  discovered.  This  was  the non-invasive 
safe-procedure. 
Also  computer-axial  tomography  or CT scan,  a non-invasive 
procedure  and magnetic  resonance  imaging  were  devised.  These  were 
extremely  useful,  sensitive  means  of understanding  the dynamics  of 
body  structure  in health  and disease. 
Tissue  culture  was  developed  which  was  new  and exciting  field  of 
research. 
New  advances  in cases  of infertility  were  discovered,  which  gave 
hopes  to some  infertile  couples.  GIFT:  Gamete  Intrafallopian  Transfer 
got started 
10. Twenty  First  Century 
Foetal  medicine  is emerging  as a newer  subject.  Even  treatment 
'in-utero'  is being  practised  in some  cases. 
Human  genome  is being  prepared. 
New  research  in drugs  for many  diseases,  especially  AIDS,  is being 
done  very  enthusiastically.  There  is also  a strong  possibility  of gene 
therapy. 
Indian  Anatomists 
Dr. Inderjit  Dewan  worked  chiefly  on osteology  and anthropology. 
Dr. D.S.  Choudhry  did notable  work  on carotid  body. 
Dr. H. Chaterjee  and Dr. H. Verma  researched  on embryology. 
Dr. S.S.  Dayal  did good  work  in cancer  biology. 
Dr. Shamer  Singh  and his team  did pioneering  work  on teratology. 
Dr. Chaturvedi  and  Dr. C.D.  Gupta's  prominent  work  was  on 
corrosion  cast. 
Introduction  I 9 
Dr. L.V.  Chako,  Dr. H.N.  Keswani,  Dr. Veena  Bijlani,  Dr. Gopinath, 
Dr. Shashi  Wadhwa  of All India  Institute  of Medical  Sciences, 
New  Delhi,  researched  on neuroanatomy. 
Dr. Keswani  and his team  established  museum  of history  of medicine. 
Dr. A.K.  Susheela  of AIIMS,  New  Delhi,  has done  profound  work 
on fluorosis. 
Dr. M.C.  Vaidya  was  well  known  for his work  on leprosy  and HLA. 
Dr. I.B. Singh  of Rohtak  did enlightening  studies  on histology.  He 
has been  author  of several  books  in anatomy. 
Dr. A.K.  Dutta  of West  Bengal  has authored  many  books  on anatomy. 
Amongst  the medical  educationists  are Dr. Sita  Achaya,  Dr. Ved 
Prakash,  Dr. Basu,  Dr. M. Kaul,  Dr. Chandrama  Anand,  Dr. Indira 
Bahl,  Dr. Rewa  Choudhry,  Dr. Smita  Kakar,  Dr. Anita  Tuli,  Dr. Shashi 
Raheja,  Dr. Ram  Prakash,  Dr. Veena  Bharihoke,  Dr. Madhur  Gupta, 
Dr. J.M.  Kaul,  Dr. Shipra  Paul,  Dr. Dharamnarayan,  Dr. A.C.  Das, 
Dr. A. Halim,  Dr. D.R.  Singh  and many  others. 
Dr. Swarna  Bhardwaj,  an educationist,  was  appointed  as Executive 
Director  of "DNB  office"  and has brought  the institution  to forefront. 
Dr. Harish  Agarwal,  an anatomist,  worked  in jurisprudence  for a 
number  of years. 
Dr. Cooper  of Chennai,  Dr. M. Thomas  and Dr. Kiran  Kucheria  did 
commendable  work  on genetics. 
Dr. Mehdi  Hasan  and  Dr. Nafis  Ahmad  Faruqi  did pioneering 
research  in neuroanatomy. 
ANATOMICAL  NOMENCLATURE 
Galen  (2nd  century)  wrote  his book  in Greek  and Vesalius  (16th  century) 
did it in Latin.  Most  of the anatomical  terms,  therefore,  are either  in 
Greek  or Latin.  By 19th  century  about  30,000  anatomical  terms  were 
in use in the books  and journals.  In 1895,  the German  Anatomical  Society 
held a meeting  in Basle,  and approved  a list of about  5000  terms  known 
as Basle  Nomina  Anatomica  (BNA).  The  following  six rules  were 
laid down  to be followed  strictly:  (1) Each  part  shall  have  only  one 
name;  (2) each  term  shall  be in Latin;  (3) each  term  shall  be as short 
and simple  as possible;  (4) the terms  shall  be merely  memory  signs; 
(5) the related  terms  shall  be similar,  e.g. femoral  artery,  femoral  vein, 
and femoral  nerve;  and (6) the adjectives  shall  be arranged  as opposites, 
e.g. major  and minor,  superior  and inferior. 
10 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
BNA  was revised  in 1933  by a committee  of the Anatomical  Society 
of Great  Britain  and  Ireland  in a meeting  held  at Birmingham.  The 
revised  BNA  was  named  as Birmingham  Revision  (BR).  An 
independent  revision  of the BNA  was also  done  by German  anatomists 
in 1935,  and was  known  as Jena  Nomina  Anatomica  (JNA  or INA). 
However,  the BR and IN A found  only  local  and restricted  acceptance. 
In 1950,  it was  agreed  at an International  Congress  of Anatomists 
held at Oxford  that  a further  attempt  should  be made  to establish  a 
generally  acceptable  international  nomenclature.  In the  Sixth 
International  Congress  of Anatomists  held  at Paris  (1955),  a somewhat 
conservative  revision  of BNA  with  many  terms  from  BR and INA  was 
approved.  Minor  revisions  and  corrections  were  made  at the 
International  Congresses  held  in New  York  (1960),  and  Wiesbaden, 
Germany  (1965),  and the 3rd edition  of Nomina  Anatomica  (Ed.  G.A.G. 
Mitchell,  1968)  was published  by the Excerpta  Medica  Foundation. 
The drafts  on Nomina  Histologica  and  Nomina  Embryologica 
prepared  by the subcommittee  of the International  Anatomical 
Nomenclature  Committee  (IANC)  were  approved  in a plenary  session 
of the Eleventh  International  Congress  of Anatomists  held  in Leningrad 
in 1970.  After  a critical  revision,  the 4th edition  of Nomina  Anatomica 
(Ed. Roger  Warwick,  1977)  containing  Nomina  Histologica  and 
Nomina  Embryologica  was  published  by the same  publisher. 
LANGUAGE  OF ANATOMY 
Various  positions,  planes,  terms  in relation  to various  regions  and 
movements  are described. 
Positions 
• Anatomical  position:  When  a person  is standing  straight  with  eyes 
looking  forwards,  both  arms  by the side  of body,  palms  facing 
forwards,  both  feet  together,  the position  is anatomical  position 
(Fig.  1.7). 
• Supine  position:  When  a person  is lying  on her/his  back,  arms  by 
the side,  palms  facing  upwards  and feet put together,  the position  is 
supine  position  (Fig.  1.8). 
• Prone  position:  Person  lying  on his/her  face,  chest  and abdomen 
is said  to be in prone  position  (Fig.  1.9). 
Introduction  I 11 
Fig. 1.7:  Anatomical  position 
Fig. 1.9:  Prone  position Fig. 1.8:  Supine  position 
12 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
• Lithotomy  position:  Person  lying  on her back  with  legs  up and 
feet supported  in straps.  This  position  is mostly  used  during  delivery 
of the baby  (Fig.  1.10). 
Fig. 1.10:  Lithotomy  position 
Planes 
• A plane  passing  through  the centre  of the body  dividing  it into  two 
equal  right  and left halves,  is the median  or midsagittal  plane  (Fig.  1.11). 
Plane  parallel  to median  or midsagittal  plane  is the sagittal  plane. 
Fig. 1.11:  Planes  of the body Coronal  plane Transverse 
plane 
Median  plane 
Introduction  I 13 
• A plane  at right  angles  to sagittal  or median  plane  which  divides  the 
body  into  anterior  and  posterior  halves  is called  a coronal  plane 
(Fig.  1.12). 
• A plane  at right  angles  to both  sagittal  and  coronal  planes  which 
divides  the body  into  upper  and lower  parts  is called  a transverse 
plane  (Fig.  1.12). 
Terms  Used  in Relation  to Trunk 
• Ventral  or Anterior  is the front  of trunk. 
• Dorsal  or Posterior  is the back  of trunk  (Fig.  1.13). 
• Medial  is a plane  close  to the median  plane  (Fig.  1.13). 
• Lateral  is plane  away  from  the median  plane. 
• Proximal/Cranial/Superior  is close  to the head  end  of trunk 
(Fig.  1.14). 
• Distal/Caudal/Inferior  is close  to the lower  end of the trunk. 
• Superficial  is close  to skin/towards  surface  of body  (Fig.  1.15). 
• Deep  away  from  skin/away  from  surface  of body. 
• Ipsilateral  on the same  side  of the body  as another  structure 
(Fig.  1.13). 
• Contralateral  on opposite  side  of body  from  another  structure. 
• Invagination  is projection  inside. 
• Evagination  is projection  outside  (Fig.  1.16). Coronal  plane Transverse  plane 
-Median  plane 
Fig. 1.12:  Planes  of the body  in a child 
Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Fig. 1.13:  Language  of anatomy 
Fig. 1.14:  Language  of anatomy Ventral  or anterior 
Medial 
Lateral 
Ipsilateral 
Contralateral  • 
Inferior  -Dorsal  or posterior 
-Root 
-Proximal 
- Medial 
-Distal 
- Lateral  border Superior-
Dorsal/extensor 
aspect 
- Medial  border 
Lateral  border 
-Anterior  surface 
Flexor  aspect 
- Medial  border 
- Palmar 
surface 
of hand 
-Anterior  surface 
Dorsum  of foot Proximal/superior 
or 
Upper  end  ^ 
Distal  / inferior  end 
Introduction  I 15 
Fig. 1.16:  Language  of anatomy 
Terms  Used  in Relation  to Upper  Limb 
• Ventral  or Anterior  is the front  aspect  (Fig.  1.13). 
• Dorsal  or Posterior  is the back  aspect. 
• Medial  border  lies along  the little  finger,  medial  border  of forearm 
and arm. 
• Lateral  border  follows  the thumb,  lateral  border  of forearm  and 
arm (Fig.  1.14). 
• Proximal  is close  to root  of limb,  while  distal  is away  from  the root. 
• Palmar  aspect  is the front  of the palm  (Fig.  1.14). 
• Dorsal  aspect  of hand  is on the back  of palm. 
• Flexor  aspect  is front  of upper  limb. 
• Extensor  aspect  is back  of upper  limb. 
Terms  Used  in Relation  to Lower  Limb 
• Posterior  aspect  is the back  of lower  limb. 
• Anterior  aspect  is front  of lower  limb. 
• Medial  border  lies along  the big toe or hallux,  medial  border  of leg 
and thigh  (Fig.  1.13). Superficial" Deep 
Fig. 1.15:  Language  of anatomy 
Evagination Invagination 
16 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
• Lateral  border  lies along  the little  toe, lateral  border  of leg and thigh. 
• Flexor  aspect  is back  of lower  limb. 
• Extensor  aspect  is front  of lower  limb  (Fig.  1.13). 
• Proximal  is close  to the root  of limb,  while  distal  is away  from  it. 
Terms  of Relation  Commonly  Used  in Embryology  and  Comparative 
Anatomy,  but sometimes  in Gross  Anatomy 
(a) Ventral  - Towards  the belly  (like  anterior). 
(b) Dorsal  - Towards  the back  (like  posterior). 
(c) Cranial  or Rostral  - Towards  the head  (like  superior). 
(d) Caudal  - Towards  the tail. 
TERMS  RELATED  TO BODY  MOVEMENTS 
Movements  in general  at synovial  joints  are divided  into  four  main 
categories. 
1. Gliding  movement:  Relatively  flat  surfaces  move  back-and-
forth  and from  side-to-side  with  respect  to one another.  The angle 
between  articulating  bones  does  not change  significantly. 
2. Angular  movements:  Angle  between  articulating  bones 
decreases  or increases.  In flexion  there  is decrease  in angle 
between  articulating  bones  and in extension  there  is increase  in 
angle  between  articulating  bones.  Lateral  flexion  is movement 
of trunk  sideways  to the right  or left at the waist.  Adduction  is 
movement  of bone  toward  midline  whereas  abduction  is 
movement  of bone  away  from  midline. 
3. Rotation:  A bone  revolves  around  its own  longitudinal  axis.  In 
medial  rotation  anterior  surface  of a bone  of limb  is turned 
towards  the midline.  In lateral  rotation  anterior  surface  of bone 
of limb  is turned  away  from  midline. 
4. Special  movements:  These  occur  only  at certain  joints,  e.g. 
pronation,  supination  at radioulnar  joints,  protraction  and retraction 
at temporo-mandibular  joint. 
In Upper  limb 
• Flexion:  When  two flexor  surfaces  are brought  close  to each  other, 
e.g. in elbow  joint  when  front  of arm  and forearm  are opposed  to 
each  other  [Fig.  1.17  (i-v)]. 
Introduction  I 17 
• Extension:  When  extensor  or dorsal  surfaces  are brought  in as 
much  approximation  as possible,  e.g. straighten  the arm and forearm 
at the elbow  joint. 
• Abduction:  When  limb  is taken  away  from  the body. 
• Adduction:  When  limb  is brought  close  to the body. 
• Circumduction:  It is movement  of distal  end of a part of the body 
in a circle.  A combination  of extension,  abduction,  flexion  and 
adduction  in a sequence  is called  circumduction  as in bowling. 
• Medial  rotation:  When  the arm rotates  medially  bringing  the flexed 
forearm  across  the chest. 
• Lateral  rotation:  When  arm  rotates  laterally  taking  the flexed 
forearm  away  from  the body. 
• Supination:  When  the palm  is facing  forwards  or upwards,  as in 
putting  food  in the mouth  (Fig.  1.17). 
• Pronation:  When  the palm  faces  backwards  or downwards,  as in 
picking  food  with  fingers  from  the plate. 
• Adduction  of digits/fingers:  When  all the fingers  get together. 
• Abduction:  When  all fingers  separate. 
The axis of movement  of fingers  is the line passing  through  the centre 
of the middle  finger. 
• Opposition  of thumb:  When  tip of thumb  touches  the tips of any 
of the fingers. 
• Circumduction  of thumb:  Movement  of extension,  abduction, 
flexion  and adduction  in sequence. 
In Lower  Limb 
• Flexion  of thigh:  When  front  of thigh  comes  in contact  with  front 
of abdomen. 
• Extension  of thigh:  When  person  stands  erect. 
• Abduction:  When  thigh  is taken  away  from  the median  plane. 
• Adduction:  When  thigh  is brought  close  to median  plane. 
• Medial  rotation:  When  thigh  is turned  medially. 
• Lateral  rotation:  When  thigh  is turned  laterally  (Fig.  1.18). 
• Flexion  of knee:  When  back  of thigh  and  back  of leg come  in 
opposition. 
18 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(i) Circumduction: 
Moving  in circular 
Bending,  decreasing 
the joint  angle 
(iii) Extension: 
Straightening,  increasing 
the joint  angle away  from  midline 
Adduction:  Moving 
toward  midline 
(v) Pronation: 
Turning  downward 
Supination: 
Turning  upward 
Fig. 1.17:  Terms  related  to movements  of upper  limb 
• Extension  of knee:  When  thigh  and  leg are in straight  line  as in 
standing. 
• Dorsiflexion  of foot:  When  dorsum  of foot  is brought  close  to front 
of leg and sole  faces  forwards  (Fig.  1.18). 
• Plantarflexion  of foot:  When  sole  of foot  or plantar  aspect  of foot 
faces  backwards. 
• Inversion  of foot:  When  medial  border  of foot  is raised  from  the 
ground  (Fig.  1.18). 
• Eversion  of foot:  When  lateral  border  of foot  is raised  from  the 
ground. 
In the Neck 
•Flexion:  When  face  comes  closer  to chest. 
• Extension:  When  face  is brought  away  from  the chest. 
Introduction  I 19 
(i) Medial  rotation:  Lateral  rotation: 
Turning  toward  midline  Turning  away  from  midline 
(ii) Eversion: 
Turning  outward Inversion: 
Turning  inward 
Fig. 1.18:  Terms  related  to movements  of lower  limb 
• Lateral  flexion:  When  ear is brought  close  to shoulder. 
»Rotation:  When  neck  rotates  so that chin  goes  to opposite  side. 
• Opening  the mouth:  When  lower  jaw is lowered  to open  the mouth. 
• Closure  of the mouth:  When  lower  jaw is opposed  to the upper 
jaw, closing  the mouth. 
• Protraction:  When  lower  jaw slides  forwards  in its socket  in the 
temporal  bone  of skull. 
• Retraction:  When  lower  jaw slides  backwards  in its socket  in the 
temporal  bone  of skull  (Fig.  1.19). (iii) Dorsiflexion Plantarflexion 
Fig. 1.19:  Retraction  and  protraction  at temporo-mandibular  joints 
In the Trunk 
• Backward  bending  is called  extension. 
• Forward  bending  is flexion  (Fig.  1.20). 
• Sideward  movement  is lateral  flexion. 
• Sideward  rotation  is lateral  rotation. 
Fig. 1.20:  Movements  of the trunk:  (a) extension,  (b) flexion,  (c) lateral  flexion 
Terms  Used  for Describing  Muscles 
(a) Origin:  The  end of a muscle  which  is relatively  fixed  during  its 
contraction  (Fig.  1.21). 
(b) Insertion:  The  end  of a muscle  which  moves  during  its 
contraction. 20 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Protraction detraction 
Introduction  I 21 
The two terms,  origin  and insertion,  are sometimes  interchangeable, 
when  the origin  moves  and the insertion  is fixed. 
(c) Belly:  The  fleshy  and contractile  part  of a muscle. 
(d) Tendon:  The  fibrous  noncontractile  and  cord-like  part  of a 
muscle. 
(e) Aponeurosis:  The  flattened  tendon. 
(f) Raphe:  A fibrous  band  made  up of interdigitating  fibres  of the 
tendons  or aponeuroses.  Unlike  a ligament,  it is stretchable. 
Ligaments  are fibrous,  inelastic  bands  which  connect  two 
segments  of a joint. 
Terms  Used  for Describing  Vessels 
(a) Arteries  carry  oxygenated  blood  away  from  the heart,  with  the 
exception  of the pulmonary  and umbilical  arteries  which  carry 
deoxygenated  blood.  Arteries  resemble  trees  because  they  have 
branches  (arterioles)  (Fig.  1.22). /Biceps  brachii  tendon 
inserted  into 
radial  tuberosity - Origin  of short  head 
from  coracoid  process 
Origin  of long  head  from 
supraglenoid  tubercle 
Muscle  belly 
Bicipital  aponeurosis 
Fig. 1.21:  Terms  used  for describing  muscles 
Fig. 1.22:  Artery,  capillaries  arid vein 
(b) Veins  carry  deoxygenated  blood  towards  the heart,  with  the 
exception  of the pulmonary  and  umbilical  veins  which  carry 
oxygenated  blood.  Veins  resemble  rivers  because  they  have 
tributaries  (venules).  Veins  have  valves  to allow  unidirectional 
flow  of blood. 
(c) Capillaries  are networks  of microscopic  vessels  connecting 
arterioles  to venules. 
(d) Anastomosis  is a precapillary  or postcapillary  communication 
between  the neighbouring  vessels  (Fig.  1.23). 
Terms  Used  for Describing  Bone  Features 
(a) Elevations 
1. Linear  elevation  may  be a line,  lip, ridge,  or crest. 
2. Sharp  elevation  may  be a spine,  styloid  process,  cornu  (horn), 
or hamulus  (Fig.  1.24). 
3. Rounded  or irregular  elevation  may  be a tubercle,  tuberosity, 
epicondyle,  malleolus,  or trochanter.  A ramus  is a broad  arm 
or process  projecting  from  the main  part  or body  of the bone 
(Figs  1.25-1.27). 
(b) Depressions  may  be a pit, impression,  fovea,  fossa,  groove 
(sulcus),  or notch  (incisura). 
(c) Openings  may  be a foramen,  canal,  hiatus,  or aqueduct. 22 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Artery 
Valve  in the vein 
Introduction  ! 23 
Radial  recurrent  artery  -
Interosseous  recurrent-
from posterior  interosseous 
Radial  artery - Brachial  artery 
Superior  ulnar  collateral  artery 
Supratrochlear  (inferior  ulnar 
collateral  artery) 
- Anterior  ulnar  recurrent 
- Posterior  ulnar  recurrent 
- Common  interosesseous 
- Ulnar  artery 
Anterior  interosseous 
Fig. 1.23:  Anastomoses  around  elbow  joint 
Fig. 1.24:  Norma  basalis From  profunda-
brachii  artery 
Anterior  and 
posterior 
descending 
branches 
Styloid  process 
Foramen 
magnum Mastoid  process 
24 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Fig. 1.25:  Norma  frontalis Nasal  bone 
Zygomatic  bone 
Infraorbital 
foramen 
Intermaxillary 
suture 
Mandible Anterior  nasal  spine 
Ramus 
Angle  of mandbile 
Mental  foramen Frontal  bone 
Coronal  suture 
Optic  canal 
Superior  orbital 
fissure 
Lateral  supracondylar 
ridge 
Lateral  epicondyle 
Capitulum Acromion 
Head 
Greater  tubercle 
Lesser  tubercle 
Anterior  border 
Deltoid  tuberosity Coracoid  process 
' Superior  angle 
Humerus 
Medial  supracondylar  ridge 
Medial  epicondyle 
Trochlea — Medial  border 
Inferior  angle 
Lateral  border 
Fig. 1.26:  Right  scapula  and  humerus  (anterior  view) 
Introduction  ! 25 
(d) Cavities:  A large  cavity  within  a bone  is called  sinus,  cell or 
antrum. 
(e) Smooth  articular  areas  may  be a facet,  condyle,  head, 
capitulum,  or trochlea. 
Terms  Used  in Clinical  Anatomy 
1. The  suffix,  '-itis',  means  inflammation,  e.g. appendicitis,  tonsillitis, 
arthritis,  neuritis,  dermatitis,  etc. 
2. The  suffix,  '-ectomy',  means  removal  from  the body,  e.g. 
appendicectomy,  tonsillectomy,  gastrectomy,  nephrectomy,  etc. 
3. The  suffix,  '-otomy',  means  to open  and  then  close  a hollow 
organ,  e.g. laparotomy,  hysterotomy,  cystotomy,  cystolithotomy, 
etc. Fig. 1.27  Femur—anterior  surface  (a) and  posterior  surface  (b) <a> Articular  surface  for patella  Intercondylar  fossa  (b) "Popliteal  surface 
" Lateral 
epicondyle -Gluteal 
tuberosity Greater-
trochanter Head 
Interochanteric  line ^ 
Neck-
Interochanteric  crest 
Lesser  trochanter 
Spiral  line 
Anterior  surface 
Linea  aspera  with  two lips-
Lateral  supracondylar  line 
Medial  supracondylar  line\J 
\ Medial  condyle  ^Ny 
0k / Adductor  tubercle// 
Medial— 
epicondyle Lateral-
condyle 
26 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
4. The  suffix,  '-ostomy',  means  to open  hollow  organ  and leave  it 
open,  e.g. cystostomy,  colostomy,  tracheostomy,  etc. 
5. The  suffix,  '-oma\  means  a tumour,  e.g. lipoma,  osteoma, 
neurofibroma,  haemangioma,  carcinoma,  etc. 
6. Puberty:  The  age  at which  the secondary  sexual  characters 
develop,  being  12-15  years  in girls  and 13-16  years  in boys. 
7. Symptoms  are subjective  complaints  of the patient  about  his 
disease. 
8. Signs  (physical  signs)  are objective  findings  of the doctor  on 
the patient. 
9. Diagnosis:  Identification  of a disease,  or determination  of the 
nature  of a disease. 
10. Prognosis:  Forecasting  the probable  course  and ultimate  outcome 
of a disease. 
11. Pyrexia:  Fever. 
12. Lesion:  Injury,  or a circumscribed  pathologic  change  in the 
tissues. 
13. Inflammation  is the local  reaction  of the tissues  to an injury  or 
an abnormal  stimulation  caused  by a physical,  chemical,  or biologic 
agent.  It is characterized  by: (a) Swelling;  (b) pain;  (c) redness; 
(d) warmth  of heat;  and (e) loss  of function. 
14. Oedema:  Swelling  due to accumulation  of fluid  in the extracellular 
space. 
15. Thrombosis:  Intravascular  coagulation  (solidification)  of blood. 
16. Embolism:  Occlusion  of a vessel  by a detached  and circulating 
thrombus  (embolus). 
17. Haemorrhage:  Bleeding  which  may  be external  or internal. 
18. Ulcer:  A localized  breach  (gap,  erosion)  in the surface  continuity 
of the skin  or mucous  membrane. 
19. Sinus:  A blind  track  (open  at one end)  lined  by epithelium. 
20. Fistula:  A track  open  at both  the ends  and lined  by epithelium. 
21. Necrosis:  Local  death  of a tissue  or organ  due  to irreversible 
damage  to the nucleus. 
22. Degeneration:  A retrogressive  change  causing  deterioration  in 
the structural  and functional  qualities.  It is a reversible  process, 
but may  end in necrosis. 
Introduction  ! 27 
23. Gangrene:  A form  of necrosis  (death)  combined  with 
putrefaction. 
24. Infarction:  Death  (necrosis)  of a tissue  due to sudden  obstruction 
of its artery  of supply  (often  an end-artery). 
25. Atrophy:  Diminution  in the size  of cells,  tissue,  organ,  or a part 
due to loss  of its nutrition. 
26. Dystrophy:  Diminution  in the size due to defective  nutrition. 
27. Hypertrophy:  Increase  in the size  without  any  increase  in the 
number  of cells. 
28. Hyperplasia:  Increase  in the size  due to increase  in the number 
of cells. 
29. Hypoplasia:  Incomplete  development. 
30. Aplasia:  Failure  of development. 
31. Syndrome:  A group  of diverse  symptoms  and signs  constituting 
together  the picture  of a disease. 
32. Paralysis:  Loss  of motor  power  (movement)  of a part  of body 
due to denervation  or primary  disease  of the muscles. 
33. Hemiplegia:  Paralysis  of one-half  of the body. 
34. Paraplegia:  Paralysis  of both  the lower  limbs. 
35. Monoplegia:  Paralysis  of any one limb. 
36. Quadriplegia:  Paralysis  of all the four  limbs. 
37. Anaesthesia:  Loss  of the touch  sensibility. 
38. Analgesia:  Loss  of the pain  sensibility. 
39. Thermanaesthesia:  Loss  of the temperature  sensibility. 
40. Hyperaesthesia:  Abnormally  increased  sensibility. 
41. Paraesthesia:  Perverted  feeling  of sensations. 
42. Coma:  Deep  unconsciousness. 
43. Tumour  (neoplasm):  A circumscribed,  noninflammatory, 
abnormal  growth  arising  from  the body  tissues. 
44. Benign:  Mild  illness  or growth  which  does  not endanger  life. 
45. Malignant:  Severe  form  of illness  or growth,  which  is resistant 
to treatment  and ends  in death. 
46. Carcinoma:  Malignant  growth  arising  from  the epithelium 
(ectoderm  or endoderm). 
47. Sarcoma:  Malignant  growth  arising  from  connective  tissue 
(mesoderm). 
28 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
48. Cancer:  A general  term  used  to indicate  any malignant  neoplasm 
which  shows  invasiveness  and results  in death  of the patient. 
49. Metastasis:  Spread  of a local  disease  (like  the cancer  cells)  to 
distant  parts  of the body. 
50. Convalescence:  The  recovery  period  between  the end  of a 
disease  and restoration  to complete  health. 
51. Therapy:  Medical  treatment. 
ARRANGEMENT  OF STRUCTURES  IN THE BODY  FROM  WITHIN 
OUTWARDS 
1. Bones  form  the supporting  framework  of the body. 
2. Muscles  are attached  to bones. 
3. Blood  vessels,  nerves  and lymphatics  form  neurovascular  bundles 
which  course  in between  the muscles,  along  the fascial  planes. 
4. The  thoracic  and abdominal  cavities  contain  several  internal  organs 
called  viscera. 
5. The  whole  body  has three  general  coverings,  namely  (a) skin;  (b) 
superficial  fascia;  and (c) deep  fascia. 
Skeleton 
Skeleton  includes  bones  and cartilages.  It forms  the main  supporting 
framework  of the body,  and is primarily  designed  for a more  effective 
production  of movements  by the attached  muscles. 
BONES 
Synonyms 
1. Os (L), 
2. Osteon  (G). 
Compare  with  the terms,  osteology,  ossification,  osteomyelitis, 
osteomalacia,  osteoma,  osteotomy,  etc. 
Definition 
Bone  is one-third  connective  tissue.  It is impregnated  with  calcium 
salts which  constitute  two-thirds  part.  The  inorganic  calcium  salts 
(mainly  calcium  phosphate,  partly  calcium  carbonate,  and  traces  of 
other  salts)  make  it hard  and  rigid,  which  can  afford  resistance  to 
compressive  forces  of weight-bearing  and  impact  forces  of jumping. 
The organic  connective  tissue  (collagen  fibres)  makes  it tough  and 
resilient  (flexible),  which  can  afford  resistance  to tensile  forces.  In 
strength,  bone  is comparable  to iron  and steel. 
Despite  its hardness  and high  calcium  content  the bone  is very  much 
a living  tissue.  It is highly  vascular,  with  a constant  turn-over  of its 
calcium  content.  It shows  a characteristic  pattern  of growth.  It is 
subjected  to disease  and heals  after  a fracture.  It has greater  regenerative 
power  than  any  other  tissue  of the body,  except  blood.  It can mould 
itself  according  to changes  in stress  and strain  it bears.  It shows  disuse 
atrophy  and overuse  hypertrophy. 2 
30 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Divisions  of the Skeletal  System  (Fig.  2.1) 
Regions  of the Skeleton  Number  of Bones Cranial  and  facial 
bones: 
(mnemonic  is A-Z) AXIAL  SKELETON 
Skull Cranial  and  facial 
bones: 
(mnemonic  is A-Z) AXIAL  SKELETON 
Skull 
Cranium 8 A-D -
Face 14 Ethmoid 1 
Hyoid 1 Frontal 1 
Auditory  ossicles  (3 in each  ear): 6 G-H -
(Malleus,  incus,  stapes) Inferior  nasal 
Vertebral  column 26 choncha 2 
Thorax J-K -
Sternum 1 Lacrimal 2 
Ribs 24 Maxilla 2 
APPENDICULAR  SKELETON Mandible 1 
Pectoral  (shoulder)  girdles Nasal 2 
Clavicle 2 Occipital 1 
Scapula 2 Parietal 2 
Upper  extremities Palatine 2 
Humerus 2 Q-R -
Ulna 2 Sphenoid 1 
Radius 2 Temporal 2 
Carpals 16 U -
Metacarpals 10 Vomer 1 
Phalanges 28 W-Y -
Pelvic  (hip)  girdle Zygomatic 2 
Pelvic,  or hip bone 2 
Lower  extremities 
Femur 2 
Fibula 2 
Tibia 2 
Patella 2 
Tarsals 14 
Metatarsals 10 
Phalanges 28 
Total 206 
Skeleton  31 
Functions 
1. Bones  give  shape  and support  to the body,  and resist  any forms 
of stress  (Fig.  2.1). 
2. These  provide  surface  for the attachment  of muscles,  tendons, 
ligaments,  etc. 
3. These  serve  as levers  for muscular  actions. 
4. The  skull,  vertebral  column  and thoracic  cage  protect  brain,  spinal 
cord and thoracic  viscera,  respectively. 
5. Bone  marrow  manufactures  blood  cells. 
6. Bones  store  97%  of the body  calcium  and phosphorus. 
7. Bone  marrow  contains  reticuloendothelial  cells  which  are 
phagocytic  in nature  and take  part  in immune  responses  of the 
body. 
8. The  larger  paranasal  air sinuses  affect  the timber  of the voice. 
Parietal  bone 
Metacarpals 
Phalanges 
Patella 
Fibula 
Tibia Fibula 
Tibia 
Talus •Tarsals 
• Metatarsals 
Phalanges Atlas 
Ribs 
Humerus 
Femur -Skull 
Clavicle 
Iliac crest 
Radius 
Ulna 
Fig. 2.1:  Human  skeleton:  (a) Anterior  view,  (b) Posterior  view Frontal  bone-
Orbit-
Maxilla-
Mandible-
Scapula. 
Carpal 
bones 
(a) (b) Acetabulum Hip 
joint 
32 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
CLASSIFICATION  OF BONES 
A. According  to Shape 
1. Long  bones:  Each  long  bone  has an elongated  shaft  (diaphysis) 
and two  expanded  ends  (epiphyses)  which  are smooth  and 
articular.  The shaft  typically  has 3 surfaces  separated  by 3 borders, 
a central  medullary  cavity,  and a nutrient  foramen  directed  away 
from  the growing  end.  Examples: 
(a) typical  long  bones  like  humerus,  radius,  ulna,  femur,  tibia 
and fibula; 
(b) miniature  long  bones  have  only  one  epiphysis  like 
metacarpals,  metatarsals  and phalanges;  and 
(c) modified  long  bones  have  no medullary  cavity  like  clavicle 
(Fig.  2.2). 
2. Short  bones:  Their  shape  is usually  cuboid,  cuneiform,  trape-
zoid,  or scaphoid.  Examples:  tarsal  and carpal  bones  (Fig.  2.3). 
3. Flat  bones  resemble  shallow  plates  and form  boundaries  of certain 
body  cavities.  Examples:  bones  in the vault  of the skull,  ribs, 
sternum  and scapula  (Fig.  2.4). 
4. Irregular  bones:  Examples:  vertebra,  hip bone,  and bones  in the 
base of the skull  (Fig.  2.5). 
5. Pneumatic  bones:  Certain  irregular  bones  contain  large  air 
spaces  lined  by epithelium  Examples:  maxilla,  sphenoid,  ethmoid, 
etc. They  make  the skull  light  in weight,  help  in resonance  of 
voice,  and act as air conditioning  chambers  for the inspired  air 
(Fig.  2.6). 
6. Sesamoid  bones:  These  are bony  nodules  found  embedded  in 
the tendons  or joint  capsules.  They  have  no periosteum  and ossify 
after  birth.  They  are related  to an articular  or nonarticular  bony 
surface,  and the surfaces  of contact  are covered  with  hyaline 
cartilage  and  lubricated  by a bursa  or synovial  membrane. 
Examples:  patella,  pisiform,  fabella,  etc. (Fig.  2.7). 
Functions  of the sesamoid  bones  are: 
(a) to resist  pressure; 
(b) to minimise  friction; 
(c) to alter  the direction  of pull of the muscle;  and 
(d) to maintain  the local  circulation. 
Skeleton  I 33 
Head 
Greater  tubercle 
Lesser  tubercle 
Anterior  border 
Deltoid  tuberosity 
Lateral  supracondylar 
ridge 
Lateral  epicondyle 
Capitulum 
Scaphoid  and  its tubercle 
Trapezium  and  its crest 
Trapezoid 
First metacarpal 
2nd,  3rd and 
4th metacarpals 
Trapezius 
Lateral  end 
Deltoid Medial  supracondylar  ridge 
Medial  epicondyle 
Trochlea 
Lunate 
Capitate 0) c 
2 
to CL Triquetral 
Pisiform 
Hamate  and  its hook 
Fifth  metacarpal 
Phalanges 
(b) 
Sternocleidomastoid 
Medial 
end 
Capsule  of 
(c) sternoclavicular  joint 
Pectoralis  major 
Fig. 2.2:  Long  bones:  (a) Humerus,  (b) Metacarpals,  (c) Clavicle Carpal  bones 
34 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Lunate 
Capitate 
Pisiform 
Hamate  and  its hook 
metacarpal Scaphoid  and  its tubercle 
Trapezium  and  its crest 
Trapezoid 
First  metacarpal  -
Fig. 2.3:  Small  bones:  Carpal  bones 
Fig. 2.4:  Flat  bones:  (a) Rib,  (b) Scapula 
Carpal  bones 
(a) (b) 
Skeleton  I 35 
Fig. 2.5:  Irregular  bones:  Vertebrae  (a) 1st cervical,  (b) 2nd  cervical 
Fig. 2.6:  Pneumatic  bone:  Ethmoid (a) 
(b) 
Ethmoidal  air cells 
Cribriform  plate  — 
Orbital  plate  — Ala 
- Nasal  slit 
t—Ethmoidal  grooves Crista  galli 
36 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
7. Accessory  (supernumerary)  bones  are not always  present. 
These  may  occur  as ununited  epiphyses  developed  from  extra 
centres  of ossification.  Examples:  sutural  bones,  os trigonum 
(lateral  tubercle  of talus),  os vesalianum  (tuberosity  of 5th 
metatarsal),  etc.  In medicolegal  practice,  accessory  bones  may 
be mistaken  for fractures.  However,  these  are often  bilateral, 
and have  smooth  surfaces  without  any callus. 
8. Heterotopic  bones:  Bones  sometimes  develop  in soft  tissues. 
Horse  riders  develop  bones  in adductor  muscles  (rider's  bones). 
B. Developmental  Classification 
1. • Membrane  (dermal)  bones  ossify  in membrane 
(intramembranous  or mesenchymal  ossification),  and are thus 
derived  from  mesenchymal  condensations.  Examples:  bones 
of the vault  of skull  and facial  bones. 
• Cartilaginous  bones  ossify  in cartilage  (intracartilaginous  or 
endochondral  ossification),  and  are  thus  derived  from 
preformed  cartilaginous  models.  Examples:  bones  of limbs, 
vertebral  column  and thoracic  cage. 
• Membrano-cartilaginous  bones  ossify  partly  in membrane 
and partly  in cartilage.  Examples:  clavicle,  mandible,  occipital, 
temporal,  sphenoid. Fig. 2.7:  Sesamoid  bone:  Patella 
Skeleton  I 37 
2. • Somatic  bones:  Most  of the bones  are somatic. 
• Visceral  bones:  These  develop  from  pharyngeal  arches. 
Examples  are hyoid  bones,  part  of mandible  and ear ossicles. 
C. Regional  Classification 
1. Axial  skeleton  includes  skull,  vertebral  column,  and thoracic  cage. 
2. Appendicular  skeleton  includes  bones  of the limbs. 
D. Structural  Classification 
I. Macroscopically,  the  architecture  of bone  may  be compact  or 
cancellous  (Fig.  2.8). 
1. Compact  bone  is dense  in texture  like  ivory,  but is extremely 
porous.  It is best  developed  in the cortex  of the long  bones. 
This  is an adaptation  to bending  and  twisting  forces 
(a combination  of compression,  tension  and shear). 
2. Cancellous  or spongy,  or trabecular  bone  is open  in texture, 
and is made  up of a meshwork  of trabeculae  (rods  and plates) 
between  which  are marrow  containing  spaces.  The  trabecular 
meshworks  are of three  primary  types,  namely: 
(a) meshwork  of rods, Fig. 2.8:  Structural  components  of a bone Thick  compact  bone - Spongy  bone 
- Medullary  cavity 
Filled  with  marrow 
38 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(b) meshwork  of rods  and plates,  and 
(c) meshwork  of plates  (Singh,  1978). 
Cancellous  bone  is an adaptation  to compressive  forces. 
Bones  are marvellously  constructed  to combine  strength, 
elasticity  and lightness  in weight.  Though  the architecture  of bone 
may be modified  by mechanical  forces,  the form  of the bone  is 
primarily  determined  by heredity. 
According  to Wolff's  law (Trajectory  Theory  of Wolff,  1892), 
the bone  formation  is directly  proportional  to stress  and strain. 
There  are two forces,  tensile  force  and compressive  force.  Both 
the tensile  and compressive  forces  can stimulate  bone  formation 
in proper  conditions. 
The architecture  of cancellous  bone  is often  interpreted  in terms 
of the trajectorial  theory.  Thus  the arrangement  of bony  trabeculae 
(lamellae)  is governed  by the lines  of maximal  internal  stress  in 
the bone.  Pressure  lamellae  are arranged  parallel  to the line  of 
weight  transmission,  whereas  tension  lamellae  are arranged  at 
right  angles  to pressure  lamellae.  The  compact  arrangement  of 
pressure  lamellae  forms  bony  buttress,  for additional  support, 
like calcar  femorale  (Fig.  2.9). 
Compression  lamellae  from  upper  part 
of the head  resist  compression  forces 
Compression  lamellae 
resist  shearing  stresses 
due to pull  of muscles 
attached  to greater 
trochanter Tension  lamellae 
from  lower  part  of 
the head  resist 
bending  forces  in 
the neck 
Calcar  femorale  resists 
shearing  stresses  between 
the neck  and  shaft 
Fig. 2.9:  Diagrammatic  representation  of the compression  (continuous  lines) 
and tension  (interrupted  lines)  lamellae  in a sagittal  section  of the upper  end 
of right  femur. 
Skeleton  I 39 
II. Microscopically,  the  bone  is of five  types,  namely  lamellar 
(including  both  compact  and cancellous),  woven,  fibrous,  dentine 
and cement. 
1. Lamellar  bone:  Most  of the mature  human  bones,  whether 
compact  or cancellous,  are composed  of thin  plates  of bony 
tissue  called  lamellae.  These  are  arranged  in piles  in a 
cancellous  bone,  but in concentric  cylinders  (Haversian  system 
or secondary  osteon)  in a compact  bone. 
2. Woven  Bone:  seen  in fetal  bone,  fracture  repair  and in cancer 
of bone 
3. Fibrous  bone  is found  in young  foetal  bones,  but are common 
in reptiles  and amphibia. 
4. Dentine  and 
5. Cement  occur  in teeth. 
Table  2.1:  Comparison  of compact  and  cancellous  bones 
Compact  bone Cancellous  (spongy)  bone 
Location In shaft  (diaphysis)  of long 
bone In the epiphyses  of long  bone 
Lamellae Arranged  to form  Haversian 
system Arranged  in a meshwork,  so 
Haversion  systems  are not 
present 
Bone  marrow Yellow  which  stores  fat after 
puberty.  It is red before 
puberty Red,  produce  RBCs,  granular 
series  of WBC  and  platelets 
Nature Hard  and  ivory  like Spongy 
GROSS  STRUCTURE  OF AN ADULT  LONG  BONE 
Naked  eye examination  of the longitudinal  and transverse  sections  of 
a long  bone  shows  the following  features. 
1. Shaft:  From  without  inwards,  it is composed  of periosteum,  cortex 
and medullary  cavity  (Fig.  2.10). 
(a) Periosteum  is a thick  fibrous  membrane  covering  the surface 
of the bone.  It is made  up of an outer  fibrous  layer,  and an 
inner  cellular  layer  which  is osteogenic  in nature.  Periosteum 
is united  to the underlying  bone  by Sharpey's  fibres,  and the 
40 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
union  is particularly  strong  over  the attachments  of tendons, 
and ligaments.  At the articular  margin  the periosteum  is 
continuous  with  the capsule  of the joint.  The  abundant 
periosteal  arteries  nourish  the outer  part  of the underlying 
cortex  also.  Periosteum  has a rich nerve  supply  which  makes 
it the most  sensitive  part  of the bone. 
(b) Cortex  is made  up of a compact  bone  which  gives  it the 
desired  strength  to withstand  all possible  mechanical  strains. 
(c) Medullary  cavity  is filled  with  red or yellow  bone  marrow. 
At birth  the marrow  is red everywhere  with  widespread 
active  haemopoiesis.  As the age advances,  the red marrow 
at many  places  atrophies  and is replaced  by yellow,  fatty 
marrow,  with  no power  of haemopoiesis.  Red  marrow 
persists  in the cancellous  ends  of long  bones.  In the sternum 
ribs, iliac  crest,  vertebrae  and skull  bones  the red marrow 
is found  throughout  life. 
2. The  two  ends  of a long  bone  are made  up of cancellous  bone 
covered  with  hyaline  (articular)  cartilage  (Fig.  2.10). 
Cortex  (compact  bone) Articular  cartilage 
Cancellous  bone 
Fibrous  capsule 
Medullary  cavity Periosteum 
Fig. 2.10:  Naked  eye  structure  of an adult  long  bone  in longitudinal  section 
Skeleton  I 41 
PARTS  OF A YOUNG  BONE 
A typical  long  bone  ossifies  in three  parts,  the two ends  from  secondary 
centres,  and the intervening  shaft  from  a primary  centre  (Fig.  2.11). 
Before  ossification  is complete  the following  parts  of the bone  can be 
defined. 
1. Epiphysis 
The ends  and tips of a bone  which  ossify  from  secondary  centres  are 
called  epiphyses.  These  are of the following  types. 
(a) Pressure  epiphysis  is articular  and takes  part  in transmission  of 
the weight.  Examples:  head  of femur;  lower  end of radius,  etc. 
(Fig.  2.12) 
(b) Traction  epiphysis  is nonarticular  and does  not take  part  in the 
transmission  of the weight.  It always  provides  attachment  to 
one or more  tendons  which  exert  a traction  on the epiphysis. 
The traction  epiphyses  ossify  later  than  the pressure  epiphyses. 
Examples:  trochanters  of femur  and  tubercles  of humerus 
(Figs  1.26  and 1.27). 
(c) Atavistic  epiphysis  is phylogenetically  an independent  bone 
which  in man  becomes  fused  to another  bone. Fig. 2.11:  Parts  of a young  long  bone. - Epiphysis 
- Epiphysial  plate  of cartilage 
- Metaphysis 
Compact  bone 
- Cancellous  bone 
- Diaphysis 
- Metaphysis 
42 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Xiphoid  process First  rib Scapula 
Atavistic  epiphysis 
Pressure  epiphysis 
Traction  epiphysis 
Sternum  manubrium Clavicle 
Fig. 2.12:  Types  of epiphyses 
Examples:  coracoid  process  of scapula  and os trigonum  or lateral 
tubercle  of talus, 
(d) Aberrant  epiphysis  is not always  present.  Examples:  epiphysis 
at the head  of the first  metacarpal  and  at the base  of other 
metacarpal  bones. 
2. Diaphysis 
It is the elongated  shaft  of a long  bone  which  ossifies  from  a primary 
centre  (Fig.  2.11). 
3. Metaphysis 
The epiphysial  ends  of a diaphysis  are called  metaphyses. 
Each  metaphysis  is the zone  of active  growth.  Before  epiphysial 
fusion,  the metaphysis  is richly  supplied  with  blood  through  end arteries 
forming  'hair-pin'  bends. 
This is the common  site  of osteomyelitis  in children  because  the 
bacteria  or emboli  are easily  trapped  in the hair-pin  bends,  causing 
infarction. 
After  the epiphysial  fusion,  vascular  communications  are established 
between  the metaphysial  and epiphysial  arteries.  Now  the metaphysis 
contains  no more  end-arteries  and  is no longer  subjected  to 
osteomyelitis. 
Skeleton  I 43 
4. Epiphysial  Plate  of Cartilage 
It separates  epiphysis  from  metaphysis. 
Proliferation  of cells  in this cartilaginous  plate  is responsible  for 
lengthwise  growth  of a long  bone. 
After  the epiphysial  fusion,  the bone  can no longer  grow  in length. 
The growth  cartilage  is nourished  by both  the epiphysial  and 
metaphysial  arteries. 
BLOOD  SUPPLY  OF BONES 
1. Long  Bones 
The blood  supply  of a long  bone  is derived  from  the following  sources 
(Fig.  2.13). 
(a) Nutrient  artery 
• It enters  the shaft  through  the nutrient  foramen,  runs  obliquely 
through  the cortex,  and divides  into  ascending  and descending 
branches  in the medullary  cavity. 
Epiphysial  arteries 
Epiphysial  plate  of cartilage 
Metaphysial  arteries 
Periosteal  arteries 
h 
Anastomosis  between  epiphysial 
and metaphysial  arteries  after 
fusion  of epiphysis 
Fig. 2.13:  Blood  supply  of a long  bone  in which  the upper  epiphysis 
(growing  end)  has  not yet fused  with  the diaphysis. Hair-pin  bends  of-
end arteries  in the 
metaphysis  before 
epiphysial  fusion 
Nutrient  artery— 
44 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
• Each  branch  divides  into  a number  of small  parallel  channels 
which  terminate  in the adult  metaphysis  by anastomosing  with 
the epiphysial,  metaphysial  and periosteal  arteries. 
• The  nutrient  artery  supplies  medullary  cavity,  inner  2/3 of cortex 
and metaphysis. 
• The  nutrient  foramen  is directed  away  from  the growing  end 
of the bone;  their  directions  are indicated  by a jingle,  'To the 
elbow  I go, from  the knee  I flee'  (Fig.  2.14). 
Fig. 2.14:  Direction  of nutrient  foramen  in the limb  bones 
• The  details  and variations  in the diaphysial  nutrient  foramina 
are described  by a number  of authors  (Ujwal,  1962;  Mysorekar, 
1967;  Chhatrapati  and  Misra,  1967;  Kate,  1971;  Patake  and 
Mysorekar,  1977;  Mysorekar  and  Nandedkar,  1979;  Longia 
et al, 1980). 
• The  growing  ends  of bones  in upper  limb  are upper  end of 
humerus  and lower  ends  of radius  and ulna.  In lower  limb,  the 
lower  end  of femur  and upper  end  of tibia  are the growing 
ends. 
(b) Periosteal  arteries 
• These  are especially  numerous  beneath  the muscular  and 
ligamentous  attachments. 
• They  ramify  beneath  the periosteum  and enter  the Volkmann's 
canals  to supply  the outer  1/3 of the cortex. Lower  limb Upper  limb 
(c) Epiphysial  arteries 
• These  are derived  from  periarticular  vascular  arcades  (circulus 
vasculosus)  found  on the nonarticular  bony  surface. 
• Out  of the numerous  vascular  foramina  in this region,  only  a 
few admit  the arteries  (epiphysial  and  metaphysial),  and the 
rest are venous  exits. 
• The  number  and size  of these  foramina  may  give  an idea  of 
the relative  vascularity  of the two ends  of a long  bone  (Tandon, 
1964). 
(d) Metaphysial  arteries 
• These  are derived  from  the neighbouring  systemic  vessels. 
• They  pass  directly  into  the metaphysis  and  reinforce  the 
metaphysial  branches  from  the primary  nutrient  artery. 
In miniature  long  bones,  the infection  begins  in the middle  of the 
shaft  rather  than  at the metaphysis  because,  the nutrient  artery  breaks 
up into  a plexus  immediately  upon  reaching  the medullary  cavity.  In 
the adults,  however,  the chances  of infection  are minimized  because 
the nutrient  artery  is mostly  replaced  by the periosteal  vessels. 
2. Other  Bones 
Short  bones  are supplied  by numerous  periosteal  vessels  which  enter 
their nonarticular  surfaces. 
In a vertebra,  the body  is supplied  by anterior  and posterior  vessels; 
and the vertebral  arch  by large  vessels  entering  the bases  of transverse 
processes.  Its marrow  is drained  by two large  basivertebral  veins. 
A rib is supplied  by : (a) the nutrient  artery  which  enters  it just 
beyond  the tubercle;  and (b) the periosteal  arteries. 
Veins  are numerous  and  large  in the cancellous,  red  marrow 
containing  bones  (e.g.,  basivertebral  veins).  In the compact  bone,  they 
accompany  arteries  in the Volkmann's  canals. 
Lymphatics  have  not been  demonstrated  within  the bone,  although 
some  of them  do accompany  the periosteal  blood  vessels,  which  drain 
to the regional  lymph  nodes. 
NERVE  SUPPLY  OF BONES 
Nerves  accompany  the blood  vessels.  Most  of them  are sympathetic 
and vasomotor  in function. 
46 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
A few of them  are sensory  which  are distributed  to the articular  ends 
and periosteum  of the long  bones,  to the vertebra,  and to large  flat bones. 
DEVELOPMENT  AND  OSSIFICATION  OF BONES 
Bones  are  first  laid  down  as mesodermal  (connective  tissue) 
condensations.  Conversion  of mesodermal  models  into  bone  is called 
intramembranous  or mesenchymal  ossification,  and the bones  are called 
membrane  (dermal)  bones. 
However,  mesodermal  stage  may  pass  through  cartilaginous  stage 
by chondrification  during  2nd  month  of intrauterine  life.  Conversion 
of cartilaginous  model  into  bone  is called  intracartilaginous  or 
endochondral  ossification,  and  such  bones  are called  cartilaginous 
bones  (Fig.  2.15). 
Ossification  takes  place  by centres  of ossification,  each  one of which 
is a point  where  laying  down  of lamellae  (bone  formation)  starts  by the 
osteoblasts  situated  on the newly  formed  capillary  loops.  The  centres 
of ossification  may  be primary  or secondary.  The  primary  centres 
appear  before  birth,  usually  during  8th week  of intrauterine  life;  the 
secondary  centres  appear  after  birth,  with  a few exceptions  of lower  end 
of femur  and upper  end of tibia.  Many  secondary  centres  appear  during 
puberty. 
A primary  centre  forms  diaphysis,  and the secondary  centres  form 
epiphyses.  Fusion  of epiphyses  with  the diaphysis  starts  at puberty 
and is complete  by the age of 25 years,  after  which  no more  bone 
growth  can take  place.  The  law of ossification  states  that  secondary 
centres  of ossification  which  appear  first  are last to unite.  The end of a 
long bone  where  epiphysial  fusion  is delayed  is called  the growing 
end of the bone. 
GROWTH  OF A LONG  BONE 
1. Bone  grows  in length  by multiplication  of cells  in the epiphysial 
plate  of cartilage  (Fig.  2.15). 
2. Bone  grows  in thickness  by multiplication  of cells  in the deeper 
layer  of periosteum. 
3. Bones  grow  by deposition  of new  bone  on the surface  and at the 
ends.  This  process  of bone  deposition  by osteoblasts  is called 
appositional  growth  or surface  accretion.  However,  in order  to 
maintain  the shape  the unwanted  bone  must  be removed.  This 
Skeleton  I 47 
process  of bone  removal  by osteoblasts  is called  remodelling. 
This is how  marrow  cavity  increases  in size. 
MEDICOLEGAL  AND  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  ASPECTS 
When  a skeleton  or isolated  bones  are received  for medicolegal 
examination,  one should  be able  to determine: 
(a) whether  the bones  are human  or not; 
(b) whether  they  belong  to one or more  persons; 
(c) the age of the individual; 
(d) the sex; 
(e) the stature;  and 
(f) the time  and cause  of death. 
For excellent  details  of all these  points  consult  Modi  (1977). 
1. Estimation  of Skeletal  Age 
Up to the age of 25 years,  the skeletal  age can be estimated  to within 
1-2 years  of correct  age  by the states  of dentition  and  ossification, 
provided  the whole  skeleton  is available. 
From  25 years  onwards,  the skeletal  age can be estimated  to within 
± 5 years  of the correct  age by the state  of cranial  sutures  and of the 
bony  surfaces  of symphysis  pubis. 
In general,  the appearance  of secondary  centres  and  fusion  of 
epiphyses  occur  about  one year  earlier  in females  than  in males. 
These  events  are also  believed  to occur  1-2 years  (Bajaj  et al, 1967) 
or 2-3 years  (Pillai,  1936)  earlier  in India  than  in Western  countries. Cancellous  bone 
Secondary  centre 
of ossification Mature  bone 
Fig. 2.15:  Growth  of a long  bone Primary  centre 
of ossification 
Calcified 
cartilage^ 
Cartilage Compact 
bone 
48 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
However,  Jit and Singh  (1971)  did not find  any difference  between  the 
eastern  and western  races. 
2. Estimation  of Sex 
Sex can be determined  after  the age of puberty. 
Sexual  differences  are best  marked  in the pelvis  and  skull,  and 
accurate  determination  of sex can be done  in over  90%  cases  with 
either  pelvis  or skull  alone. 
However,  sexual  dimorphism  has been  worked  out in a number  of 
other  bones,  like  sternum  (Jit et al, 1980),  atlas  (Halim  and Siddiqui, 
1976),  and most  of the limb  bones. 
3. Estimation  of Stature  (Height) 
It is a common  experience  that  trunk  and  limbs  show  characteristic 
ratios  among  themselves  and in comparison  with  total  height. 
Thus  a number  of regression  formulae  have  been  worked  out to 
determine  height  from  the length  of the individual  limb  bones  (Siddiqui 
and Shah,  1944;  Singh  and Sohal,  1952;  Jit and Singh,  1956;  Athawale, 
1963;  Kolte  and Bansal,  1974;  Kate  and Majumdar,  1976). 
Height  can  also  be determined  from  parts  of certain  long  bones 
(Mysorekar  et al), from  head  length  (Saxena  et al, 1981),  and from 
foot measurements  (Charnalia,  1961;  Qamra  et al, 1980). 
CR length  has been  correlated  with  diaphysial  length  of foetal  bones 
(Vare  and Bansal,  1977)  and with  the neonatal  and placental  parameters 
(Jeyasingh  et al, 1980;  Saxena  et al, 1981). 
4. Estimation  of Race 
It is of interest  to anthropologists.  A number  of metrical  (like  cranial 
and facial  indices)  and  non  metrical  features  of the skull,  pelvis, 
and certain  other  bones  are of racial  significance  (Krogman,  1962; 
Berry,  1975). 
CARTILAGE 
Synonyms 
1. Chondros  (G);  2. Gristle.  Compare  with  the terms  chondrification, 
chondrodystrophy,  synchondrosis,  etc. 
Skeleton  I 49 
Definition 
Cartilage  is a connective  tissue  composed  of cells  (chondrocytes)  and 
fibres  (collagen  or yellow  elastic)  embedded  in a firm,  gel-like  matrix 
which  is rich  in a mucopolysaccharide.  It is much  more  elastic  than 
bone. 
General  Features 
1. Cartilage  has no blood  vessels  or lymphatics.  The  nutrition  of 
cells  diffuses  through  the matrix. 
2. Cartilage  has no nerves.  It is, therefore,  insensitive. 
3. Cartilage  is surrounded  by a fibrous  membrane,  called 
perichondrium,  which  is similar  to periosteum  in structure  and 
function.  The articular  cartilage  has no perichondrium,  so that its 
regeneration  after  injury  is inadequate. 
4. When  cartilage  calcifies,  the chondrocytes  die and the cartilage 
is replaced  by bone  like  tissue. 
Table  2.2 shows  the comparison  between  bone  and cartilage. 
Table  2.2:  Comparison  between  bone  and  cartilage 
Bone Cartilage 
1. Bone  is hard Cartilage  is firm 
2. Matrix  has inflexible  material It has chondroitin  providing  flexibility 
called  ossein 
3. Matrix  possesses  calcium  salt Calcium  salts  not present 
4. Bone  has rich nerve  supply. It does  not have  nerve  supply. 
It is vascular  in nature It is avascular  in nature 
5. Bone  marrow  is present Bone  marrow  is absent 
6. Growth  is only  by apposition Growth  is appositional  and interstitial 
(by surface  deposition) (from  within) 
Types  of Cartilage 
There  are three  types  of cartilages: 
1. Hyaline  cartilage  (Fig.  2.16) 
2. Fibrocartilage  (Fig.  2.17) 
3. Elastic  cartilage  (Fig.  2.16) 
50 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Table  2.3 reveals  the comparison  between  three  types  of cartilages. 
Table  2.3:  Comparison  of three  types  of cartilages 
Hyaline  Cartilage Fibrocartilage Elastic  cartilage 
Location In the articular In the intervertebral  In the pinna,  external 
cartilages  of long disc of pubic auditory  meatus, 
bones,  sternum, symphysis, Eustachian  tubes, 
ribs, nasal  and temporomandibular  epiglottis,  vocal 
some  laryngeal joints,  sterno- process  of arytenoid 
cartilages clavicular  joint cartilage 
Colour Bluish  white Glistening  white Yellowish 
Appearance  Shiny  or Opaque Opaque 
translucent 
Fibres Very  thin,  having Numerous  white Numerous  yellow 
same  refractive fibres fibres 
index  as matrix, 
so these  are not 
seen 
Elasticity Flexible More  firm  strongest Most  flexible 
Epiglottis  (elastic) 
Hyoid  bone 
Thyroid,  cricoid 
(hyaline) 
Fig. 2.16:  Hyaline  and  elastic  cartilages 
CLINICAL  ANATOMY 
• A defect  in membranous  ossification  causes  a rare syndrome  called 
cleidocranial  dysostosis.  It is characterized  by three  cardinal 
features:  (a) Varying  degrees  of aplasia  of the clavicles;  (b) increase Fig. 2.17:  Fibrocartilage:  Intervertebral  disc Intervertebral  disc  -Skeleton  I 51 
52 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
in the transverse  diameter  of cranium,  and (c) retardation  in fontanelle 
ossification  (Srivastava  et al, 1971).  It may  be hereditary  or 
environmental  in origin. 
• A defect  in endochondral  ossification  causes  a common  type  of 
dwarfism  called  achondroplasia,  in which  the limbs  are short,  but 
the trunk  is normal.  It is transmitted  as a Mendelian  dominant 
character. 
• Periosteum  is particularly  sensitive  to tearing  or tension.  Drilling  into 
the compact  bone  without  anaesthesia  causes  only  mild  pain  or an 
aching  sensation;  drilling  into  spongy  bone  is much  more  painful. 
Fractures,  tumours  and infections  of the bone  are very  painful. 
• Blood  supply  of bone  is so rich that it is very  difficult  to interrupt  it 
sufficiently  to kill the bone.  Passing  a metal  pin into  the medullary 
cavity  hardly  interferes  with  the blood  supply  of the bone. 
• Fracture  is a break  in the continuity  of a bone.  The  fracture  which 
is not connected  with  the skin  wound  is known  as simple  (closed) 
fracture.  The fracture  line may  be (a) oblique  or (b) horizontal.  The 
fracture  which  communicates  with  the skin  wound  is known  as (c) 
compound  (open)  fracture.  A fracture  requires  "reduction"  by which 
the alignment  of the broken  ends  is restored  (Fig.  2.18). 
(a) 
Closed  and 
oblique  line (b) 
Closed  and 
horizontal  line (c) 
Open 
Fig. 2.18:  Types  of fractures 
Skeleton  I 53 
Healing  (repair)  of a fracture  takes  place  in three  stages: 
(a) Repair  by granulation  tissue; 
(b) union  by callus;  and 
(c) consolidation  by mature  bone. 
• Axis  or 2nd cervical  vertebra  may  get fractured.  If dens  of axis  gets 
separated  from  the body,  it hits  the vital  centres  in the medulla 
oblongata  causing  instantaneous  death  (Fig.  2.19).  Even  fracture  of 
laminae  may  cause  death. 
Fig. 2.19:  "Hanging  till death"  occurs  due  to fracture  of dens  of axis 
vertebra 
• In rickets  (deficiency  of vitamin  D), calcification  of cartilage  fails 
and ossification  of the growth  zone  is disturbed.  Rickets  affects  the 
growing  bones  and,  therefore,  the disease  develops  during  the period 
of most  rapid  growth  of skeleton,  i.e. 3 months  to 3 years.  Osteoid 
tissue  is formed  normally  and the cartilage  cells  proliferate  freely, 
but mineralization  does  not take  place.  This  results  in craniotabes, 
rachitic  rosary  at the costochondral  junctions,  Harrison's  sulcus  at 
the diaphragmatic  attachments,  enlarged  epiphyses  in limb  bones 
(Fig.  2.20)  and the spinal  and pelvic  deformities. 
• For proper  development  of bones,  a child  requires  adequate  amounts 
of proteins,  calcium,  vitamin  D, etc.  Deficiency  of calcium  and 
vitamin  D in growing  children  leads  to widening  of ends  of bones 
with inadequate  ossification.  This  condition  is called  as rickets 
(Fig.  2.20). 
Fig. 2.20:  (a) Rickets,  (b) Normal 
• In scurvy  (deficiency  of vitamin  C), formation  of collagenous  fibres 
and matrix  is impaired.  Defective  formation  of the intercellular 
cementing  substances  and  lack  of collagen  cause  rupture  of 
capillaries  and defective  formation  of new  capillaries.  Haematoma 
in the muscles  and  bones  (subperiosteal)  cause  severe  pain  and 
tenderness.  The normal  architecture  at the growing  ends  of the bones 
is lost. 
• Many  skeletal  defects  are caused  by genetic  factors,  or by a 
combination  of genetic,  hormonal,  nutritional  and  pathological 
factors. 
• The vertebral  arch  or laminae  of the vertebral  column  may  remain 
deficient,  the spinal  cord  may  be covered  by skin,  i.e. (a) spina  bifida 
occulta.  There  may  be protrusion  of the meninges  surrounding  the 
spinal  cord  placed  in the vertebral  canal,  i.e. (b) meningocele  or 
there  may  be protrusion  of the spinal  cord  as well  as meninges,  i.e. 
(c) meningo-myelocele  (Fig.  2.21). 
(c) meningo-myelocele (a) (b) 54 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(a) (b)  (c) 
Fig. 2.21:  Types  of spina  bifida:  (a) Spina  bifida  occulta,  (b) Meningocele, 
Skeleton  I 55 
• If deficiency  of calcium,  vitamin  D occurs  in adult  life,  it leads 
osteomalacia.  The  bones  on X-rays  examination  do not reveal 
enough  trabeculae. 
Deficiency  of calcium  in bones  in old age  leads  to osteoporosis, 
seen both  in females  and males.  Due  to osteoporosis,  there  is forward 
bending  of the  vertebral  column,  leading  to kyphosis 
(Fig.  2.22). 
• Nerves  are closely  related  to bones  in some  areas.  Fracture  of the 
bones  of those  areas  may  lead  to injury  to the nerve,  leading  to 
paralysis  of muscles  supplied  including  the  sensory  loss 
(Fig.  2.23). 
Table  2.4:  Comparison  of osteoporosis  and  osteomalacia 
Calcium  & Alkaline  Osteo-  Trabeculae 
phosphate  phosphatase  blast 
Osteoporosis  Normal  Normal  Normal  Thin  and  small 
Osteomalacia  May  be low Raised  Increased  Thick  uncalcified 
osteoid Fig. 2.22:  Kyphosis  due  to Fig.  2.23:  Nerves  in contact  with 
osteoporosis  posterior  surface  of humerus Axillary 
Radial 
Ulnar-
56 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
• Bone  marrow  biopsy:  Bone  marrow  can  be taken  either  from 
manubrium  sterni  or iliac  crest  in various  clinical  conditions 
(Fig.  2.24). 
• Bone  tumour:  Benign  or malignant  tumours  can occur  in the bone 
(Fig.  2.25). 
Fig. 2.24:  Bone  marrow  biopsy 
Fig. 2.25:  Malignant  tumour  of the bone - Malignant  tumour 
3 
Joints 
Related  Terms 
1. Arthron  (G.  a joint).  Compare  with  the  terms  arthrology, 
synarthrosis,  diarthrosis,  arthritis,  arthrodesis,  etc. 
2. Articulatio  (L a joint);  articulation  (NA). 
3. Junctura  (L a joint). 
4. Syndesmology  (G. syndesmosis  = ligament)  is the study  of 
ligaments  and related  joints. 
Definition 
Joint  is a junction  between  two  or more  bones  or cartilages.  It is a 
device  to permit  movements. 
However,  immovable  joints  are primarily  meant  for growth,  and 
may permit  moulding  during  childbirth. 
There  are more  joints  in a child  than  in an adult  because  as growth 
proceeds  some  of the bones  fuse  together,  e.g. the ilium,  ischium  and 
pubis  to form  the pelvic  bone;  the two halves  of the infant  frontal  bone, 
and of the  infant  mandible;  the five  sacral  vertebrae  and  the four 
coccygeal  vertebrae. 
CLASSIFICATION  OF JOINTS 
A. Structural  Classification 
1. Fibrous  joints 
(a) Sutures 
(b) Syndesmosis 
(c) Gomphosis 
58 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
2. Cartilaginous  joints 
(a) Primary  cartilaginous  joints  or synchondrosis 
(b) Secondary  cartilaginous  joints  or symphysis 
3. Synovial  joints 
(a) Ball-and-socket  or spheroidal  joints 
(b) Sellar  or saddle  joints 
(c) Condylar  or bicondylar  joints 
(d) Ellipsoid  joints 
(e) Hinge  joints 
(f) Pivot  or trochoid  joints 
(g) Plane  joints 
B. Functional  Classification  (according  to the degree  of mobility) 
1. Synarthrosis  (immovable),  like  fibrous  joints  (Fig.3.1). 
2. Amphiarthrosis  (slightly  movable),  like  cartilaginous  joints 
(Fig.  3.2). 
3. Diarthrosis  (freely  movable),  like  synovial  joints  (Fig.  3.3). 
Synarthroses  are fixed  joints  at which  there  is no movement.  The 
articular  surfaces  are joined  by tough  fibrous  tissue.  Often  the edges  of 
the bones  are dovetailed  into  one another  as in the sutures  of the skull. 
Amphiarthroses  are joints  at which  slight  movement  is possible.  A 
pad of cartilage  lies between  the bone  surfaces,  and there  are fibrous 
ligaments  to hold  the bones  and cartilage  in place.  The  cartilages  of 
such joints  also  act as shock  absorbers,  e.g.  the intervertebral  discs 
between  the bodies  of the vertebrae,  where  the cartilage  is strengthened 
by extra  collagen  fibres. 
Fig. 3.1:  Synarthrosis:  Fibrous  joint Suture 
Joints  i 59 
Fig. 3.2:  Amphiarthrosis:  Secondary  cartilaginous  joint 
Diarthroses  or synovial  joints  are known  as freely  movable  joints, 
though  at some  of them  the movement  is restricted  by the shape  of 
the articulating  surfaces  and by the ligaments  which  hold  the bones 
together.  These  ligaments  are of elastic  connective  tissue. 
A synovial  joint  has a fluid-filled  cavity  between  articular  surfaces 
which  are covered  by articular  cartilage.  The  fluid,  known  as synovial 
fluid,  produced  by the synovial  membrane  which  lines  the cavity  except 
for the actual  articular  surfaces  and covers  any ligaments  or tendons 
which  pass  through  the joint.  Synovial  fluid  acts  as a lubricant. 
The form  of the articulating  surfaces  controls  the type  of movement 
which  takes  place  at any joint. 
The movements  possible  at synovial  joints  are: 
Angular  flexion  :  decreasing  the  angle  between  two 
bones; -Capsule 
-Articular 
cartilage 
-Synovial 
membrane Male  surface— 
Female  surface— 
Fig. 3.3:  Diarthrosis:  Simple  synovial  joint -Intervertebral 
joint 
60 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
extension  :  increasing  the angle  between  two bones; 
abduction  :  moving  the part away  from  the mid-line; 
adduction  :  bringing  the part  towards  the mid-line. 
Rotary  rotation  :  turning  upon  an axis; 
circumduction:  moving  the extremity  of the part  round 
in a circle  so that  the  whole  part 
inscribes  a cone. 
Gliding  one  part  slides  on another. 
C. Regional  Classification 
1. Skull  type:  immovable. 
2. Vertebral  type:  slightly  movable. 
3. Limb  type:  freely  movable. 
D. According  to number  of articulating  bones 
1. Simple  joint:  When  two  bones  articulate,  e.g.  interphalangeal 
joints  (Fig.  3.3). 
2. Compound  joint:  More  than  two  bones  articulate  within  one 
capsule,  e.g. elbow  joint,  wrist  joint  (Fig.  3.4). 
3. Complex  joint:  When  joint  cavity  is divided  by an intra-articular 
disc,  e.g.,  temporomandibular  joint  (Fig.  3.5) and sternoclavicular 
joint. 
Intercarpal  joint 
Triquetral 
Lunate 
— Wrist  joint 
Ulna 
Fig. 3.4:  Compound  joint:  Wrist  joint Scaphoid  bone  -
Radius 
Joints  i 61 
The structural  classification  is most  commonly  followed,  and will 
be considered  in detail  in the following  paragraphs. 
FIBROUS  JOINTS 
In fibrous  joints  the bones  are joined  by fibrous  tissue.  These  joints  are 
either  immovable  or permit  a slight  degree  of movement.  These  can be 
grouped  in the following  three  subtypes. 
1. Sutures:  These  are peculiar  to skull,  and  are immovable. 
According  to the shape  of bony  margins,  the sutures  can be: 
(i) Plane,  e.g. internasal  suture 
(ii) Serrate,  e.g. interparietal  suture 
(iii) Squamous,  e.g. temporo-parietal  suture 
(iv) Denticulate,  e.g. lambdoid  suture 
(v) Schindylesis  type  (Fig.  3.6),  e.g.  between  rostrum  of 
sphenoid  and upper  border  of vomer. 
Neonatal  skull  reveals  fontanelles  which  are temporary  in nature. 
At six specific  points  on the sutures  in new  born  skull  are 
membrane  filled  gaps  called  "fontanelles".  These  allow  the 
underlying  brain  to increase  in size.  Anterior  fontanelle  is used 
to judge  the hydration  of the infant.  All these  fontanelles  become 
bone  by 18 months  (Fig.  3.7). 
2. Syndesmosis:  The  bones  are connected  by the interosseous 
ligament.  Example:  inferior  tibiofibular  joint  (Fig.  3.8). 
3. Gomphosis  (peg  and socket  joint).  Example:  root  of the tooth  in 
its bony  socket  (Fig.  3.9). Articular  tubercle Mandibular  fossa 
Intra-articulardisc Squamotympanic  fissure 
Head  of mandible 
Tympanic  plate 
Fibrous  capsule 
Fig. 3.5:  Complex  joint:  Temporomandibular  joint 
62 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Pericranium 
Endocranium Suture  ligament 
(sutural  membrane) 
— Skull  bone 
(i) Plane  suture 
(ii) Serrate  suture (iii) Squamous  suture 
Ala of-
vomer Rostrum  of 
sphenoid 
(iv) Denticulate  suture (v) Schindylesis 
(wedge  and  groove  suture) 
Fig. 3.6:  Types  of sutures 
Posterior 
Posteroinferior Anterior 
Anteroinferior 
Fig. 3.7:  Fontanelles 
Fig. 3.8:  Inferior  tibiofibular  joint - Interosseous  tibiofibular  ligament 
Inferior  transverse  tibiofibular  ligament 
Joints  I 63 
CARTILAGINOUS  JOINTS 
In this type  of joints  the bones  are joined  by cartilage.  These  are of the 
following  two types: 
1. Primary  cartilaginous  joints  (synchondrosis,  or hyaline  cartilage 
joints):  The  bones  are united  by a plate  of hyaline  cartilage  so 
that the joint  is immovable  and strong. 
These  joints  are temporary  in nature  because  after  a certain  age 
the cartilaginous  plate  is replaced  by bone  (synostosis). 
Examples: 
(a) Joint  between  epiphysis  and diaphysis  of a growing  long  bone 
(Fig.  3.10) - Incisor  line 
Pulp cavity 
Cemento-enamel  junction 
Cement 
Periodontal  membrane 
• Alveolar  bone Fig. 3.9:  Gomphosis Clinical  crown  -
Gum 
Root with 
arteriole 
Epiphysis 
Epiphysial  plate 
- Diaphysis 
Fig. 3.10:  Primary  cartilaginous  joint 
64 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(b) Spheno-occipital  joint 
(c) First  chondrosternal  joint 
(d) Costochondral  joints. 
2. Secondary  cartilaginous  joints  (symphyses  or fibrocartilaginous 
joints):  The articular  surfaces  are covered  by a thin layer  of hyaline 
cartilage,  and united  by .a disc  of fibrocartilage. 
These  joints  are permanent  and  persist  throughout  life.  In this 
respect  symphysis  menti  is a misnomer  as it is a synostosis. 
Typically  the secondary  cartilaginous  joints  occur  in the median 
plane  of the  body,  and  permit  limited  movements  due  to 
compressible  pad of fibro-cartilage  such  as in the pubic  symphysis 
and manubriosternal  joints. 
The thickness  of fibrocartilage  is directly  related  to the range  of 
movement.  Secondary  cartilaginous  joints  may  represent  an 
intermediate  stage  in the evolution  of synovial  joints. 
Examples: 
(a) Symphysis  pubis 
(b) Manubriosternal  joint 
(c) Intervertebral  joints  between  the vertebral  bodies  (Fig.  3.2). 
SYNOVIAL  JOINTS 
Synovial  joints  are most  evolved,  and,  therefore,  most  mobile  type  of 
joints. 
Classification  of Synovial  Joints  and  their  Movements 
Type  of Joint Movement 
A. Plane  or gliding  type Gliding  movement 
B. Uniaxial  joints 
1. Hinge  joint Flexion  and  extension 
2. Pivot  joint Rotation  only 
C. Biaxial  joints 
1. Condylar  joint Flexion  and extension,  and  limited  rotation 
2. Ellipsoid  joint Flexion,  extension,  abduction,  adduction,  and 
circumduction 
D. Multiaxial  joints 
1. Saddle  joint Flexion  and  extension,  abduction,  adduction, 
and conjunct  rotation 
2. Ball-and-socket Flexion  and extension,  abduction  and 
(spheroidal)  joint adduction,  circumduction,  and  rotation 
Joints  I 65 
Characters 
1. The  articular  surfaces  are covered  with  hyaline  (articular)  cartilage 
(fibrocartilage  in certain  membrane  bones). 
Articular  cartilage  is avascular,  non-nervous  and  elastic. 
Lubricated  with  synovial  fluid,  the cartilage  provides  slippery 
surfaces  for free  movements,  like  'ice on ice'. 
The surface  of the cartilage  shows  fine  undulations  filled  with 
synovial  fluid. 
2. Between  the articular  surfaces  there  is a joint  cavity  filled  with 
synovial  fluid.  The  cavity  may  be partially  or completely 
subdivided  by an articular  disc  or meniscus  (Fig.  3.5). 
3. The  joint  is surrounded  by an articular  capsule  which  is made  up 
of a fibrous  capsule  lined  by synovial  membrane. 
Because  of its rich  nerve  supply,  the fibrous  capsule  is sensitive 
to stretches  imposed  by movements.  This  sets  up appropriate 
reflexes  to protect  the joint  from  any sprain.  This  is called  the 
'watch-dog'  action  of the capsule. 
The fibrous  capsule  is often  reinforced  by : 
(a) Capsular  or true  ligaments  representing  thickenings  of the 
fibrous  capsule 
(b) The  accessory  ligaments  (distinct  from  fibrous  capsule)  which 
may be intra  or extracapsular. 
The synovial  membrane  lines  whole  of the interior  of the joint, 
except  for the articular  surfaces  covered  by hyaline  cartilage. 
The membrane  secretes  a slimy  viscous  fluid  called  the synovia 
or synovial  fluid  which  lubricates  the joint  and  nourishes  the 
articular  cartilage.  The viscosity  of fluid  is due to hyaluronic  acid 
secreted  by cells  of the synovial  membrane. 
4. Varying  degrees  of movements  are always  permitted  by the 
synovial  joints. 
Classification  of Synovial  Joints 
1. Plane  Synovial  Joints 
Articular  surfaces  are more  or less  flat (plane).  They  permit  gliding 
movements  (translations)  in various  directions. 
66 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Examples: 
(a) Intercarpal  joints  (Fig.  3.4) 
(b) Intertarsal  joints 
(c) Joints  between  articular  processes  of vertebrae 
(d) Cricothyroid  joint 
(e) Cricoarytenoid  joint 
(f) Superior  tibiofibular 
(g) Interchondral  joint  (5-9  ribs) 
(h) Costovertebral 
(i) Costotransverse 
(j) Acromioclavicular  with  intra-articular  disc 
(k) Carpometacarpal  (except  first) 
(1) Tarsometatarsal 
(m) Intermetacarpal 
(n) Intermetatarsal 
(o) Chondrosternal  (except  first) 
(p) Sacroiliac 
2. Hinge  Joints  (Ginglymi) 
Articular  surfaces  are pulley-shaped.  There  are strong  collateral 
ligaments.  Movements  are permitted  in one plane  around  a transverse 
axis. 
Examples: 
(a) Elbow  joint  (Fig.  3.11) 
(b) Ankle  joint 
(c) Interphalangeal  joints. 
3. Pivot  (Trochoid)  Joints 
Articular  surfaces  comprise  a central  bony  pivot  (peg)  surrounded  by 
an osteoligamentous  ring.  Movements  are permitted  in one plane  around 
a vertical  axis. 
Examples: 
(a) Superior  and inferior  radio-ulnar  joints  (Fig.  3.12) 
(b) Median  atlanto-axial  joint  (Fig.  3.13). 
Joints  I 67 
Fig. 3.12:  Radioulnar  joints - Radial  notch 
of ulna 
- Fossa  below 
superior 
radioulnar  joint 
• Interosseous 
membrane 
• Inferior  radioulnar 
joint 
Head  of ulna Head  of radius 
Superior-
radioulnar  joint 
Ulnar  notch  -
of radius 
Articular  disc  of inferior 
radioulnar  joint rig. 3.11:  Elbow  joint Radius 
Ulna smaiunn 
68 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
4. Condylar  (Bicondylar)  Joints 
Articular  surfaces  include  two distinct  condyles  (convex  male  surfaces) 
fitting  into  reciprocally  concave  female  surfaces  (which  are also, 
sometimes,  known  as condyles,  such  as in tibia).  These  joints  permit 
movements  mainly  in one plane  around  a transverse  axis,  but partly  in 
another  plane  (rotation)  around  a vertical  axis. 
Examples: 
(a) Knee  joint  (Fig.  3.14) 
(b) Right  and left jaw joints  or temporomandibular  joint  (Fig.  3.15). 
Fig. 3.14:  Knee  joint • Median 
atlantoaxial  joint 
Fig. 3.13:  Median  atlantoaxial  joint 
k Femur 
'Tibia 
Fibula  I 
Joints  I 69 
Mandibular  fossa 
Fibrous  ca| Articular 
Head  of mandible 
Fig.  3.15:  Temporomandibular  joint 
5. Ellipsoid  Joints 
Articular  surfaces  include  an oval,  convex,  male  surface  fitting  into  an 
elliptical,  concave  female  surface.  Free  movements  are permitted 
around  both  the axes,  flexion  and extension  around  the transverse  axis, 
and abduction  and  adduction  around  the  anteroposterior  axis. 
Combination  of movements  produces  circumduction.  Typical  rotation 
around  a third  (vertical)  axis  does  not occur. 
Examples: 
(a) Wrist  joint  (Fig.  3.4) 
(b) Metacarpophalangeal  joints 
(c) Atlanto-occipital  joints. 
6. Saddle  (Sellar)  Joints 
Articular  surfaces  are reciprocally  concavoconvex.  Movements  are 
similar  to those  permitted  by an ellipsoid  joint,  with  addition  of some 
rotation  (conjunct  rotation)  around  a third  axis  which,  however,  cannot 
occur  independently. 
Examples: 
(a) First  carpometacarpal  joint  (Fig.  3.16) 
(b) Sternoclavicular  joint  (Fig.  3.17) 
(c) Calcaneocuboid  joint  (Fig.  3.18) 
(d) Incudomalleolar  joint 
(e) Between  femur  and patella. Intra-articular  disc  \ Squamotympanic  fissure 
Tympanic  plate 
70 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Articular  disc  is complete 
Sternoclavicular  joint 
Acromion 
Articular  disc  may 
be perforated 
Costoclavicular 
ligament Conoid  and  trapezoid  parts  of 
coracoclavicular  ligament 
Fig. 3.17:  Sternoclavicular  joint:  Saddle  variety Metacarpal  bone~-
of thumb 
Saddle  joint— 
Trapezium-
fa) 
Trapezium 
Base  of 
1st metacarpa 
(b) 
Fig. 3.16:  First  carpometacarpal  joint:  Saddle  variety 
Joints  I 71 
Calcaneocuboid  joint ncJ Talonavicular  joint 
\J0o(j 
Fig. 3.18:  Calcaneocuboid  joint:  Saddle  variety 
7. Ball-and-Socket  (Spheroidal)  Joints 
Articular  surfaces  include  a globular  head  (male  surface)  fitting  into  a 
cup-shaped  socket  (female  surface).  Movements  occur  around  an 
indefinite  number  of axes  which  have  one  common  centre.  Flexion, 
extension,  abduction,  adduction,  medial  rotation,  lateral  rotation,  and 
circumduction,  all occur  quite  freely. 
Examples: 
(a) Shoulder  joint 
(b) Hip  joint  (Fig.  3.19) 
(c) Talocalcaneonavicular  joint  (Fig.  3.20) 
(d) Incudostapedial  joint 
Fig. 3.19:  Hip joint:  Ball  and  socket  variety 
72 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Classification  and  Movements  of Synovial  Joints 
1. Terminology  and  Definition 
Human  Kinesiology:  Study  of geometry  of surfaces  and  their 
associated  movements. 
Male  surface:  An articulating  surface  which  is larger  in surface 
area and always  convex  in all directions  (Fig.  3.3). 
Female  surface:  An articulating  surface  which  is smaller  and 
concave  in all directions  (Fig.  3.3). 
Simple  joints:  Joints  with  only  two  articulating  surfaces,  i.e. male 
and female. 
Compound  joints:  Joint  possessing  more  than  one  pair  of 
articulating  surfaces. 
Degrees  of freedom:  Number  of axes  at which  the bone  in a joint 
can move. 
Uniaxial:  Movement  of bone  at a joint  is limited  to one axis,  i.e. 
with one degree  of freedom,  e.g. interphalangeal  joints. 
Biaxial:  With  two degrees  of freedom,  e.g. wrist  joint. 
Multi-axial:  Three  axes  along  with  intermediate  positions  also,  e.g. 
shoulder  joint 
Translation:  Sliding  movements  of one articulating  surface  over 
the other. 
2. Movements  and  Mechanism  of Joints 
A. Angular  movement:  Movement  leading  to diminution  or increase 
in angle  between  two  adjoining  bones.  They  are of two types: Talocalcaneonavicular  joint 
Subtalar  joint 
Fig. 3.20:  Talocalcaneonavicular  joint:  Ball  and socket  variety 
(a) Flexion  and  extension:  Bending  and straightening  respectively. 
(b) Abduction  and  adduction:  Movement  away  and towards  the 
median  plane  respectively. 
Circumduction:  When  a long  bone  circumscribes  a conical  space. 
B. Rotation:  Bone  moves  around  a longitudinal  axis. 
(a) Adjunct  rotation:  independent  rotations,  e.g. locking  of knee 
joint. 
(b) Conjunct  rotation:  rotations  which  accompany  other 
movements  as in 1st carpometacarpal  joint. 
3. Shape  of Articular  Surface 
The common  shapes  of the articular  surface  are: 
(a) Ovoid:  When  concave-female  ovoids.  When  convex-male 
ovoids. 
(b) Sellar/saddle-shaped:  These  are convex  in one plane,  concave 
in the perpendicular  plane. 
4. Mechanical  Axis  of a Bone  and  Movement  of a Bone 
It is a reference  point  around  which  joint  mechanics  can be studied 
and around  which  the most  habitual  conjunct  rotation  occurs. 
Spin:  Simple  rotation  around  the bone's  stationary  mechanical  axis. 
Swing:  Any  other  displacement  of the bone  and its mechanical  axis 
apart  from  spin  is termed  a swing. 
Swing  may  be pure  or impure  (swing  + element  of spin). 
Ovoid  of motion:  This  represents  the imaginary  surface  which  would 
include  all possible  paths  of a point  on the mechanical  axis  at some 
distance  from  its related  joint. 
Cardinal  swing:  When  the mechanical  axis  moves  in the shortest 
pathway  when  bone  moves. 
Arcuate  swing:  When  the mechanical  axis  moves  in the longest 
pathway  along  with  the bony  movement. 
Co-spin:  When  the effect  of adjunct  rotation  is additive  to the 
rotation. 
Anti-spin:  Adjunct  rotation  which  has a nullifying  effect  on rotation. 
Basic  components  of movements  of the synovial  joints  are: 
(1) Spin,  (2) Sliding,  and (3) Rolling. 
1. Spin:  It occurs  around  a fixed  mechanical  axis. 
74 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
2. Slide-.  During  sliding  movement,  the 
mechanical  axis  of the joint  and both  ends  of 
a moving  bone  move  in the same  direction. 
The transverse  axis  of movement  is not fixed 
and it undergoes  gliding  or translation  or 
linear  movement. 
3. Rolling:  In rolling  movement,  one end of the 
mechanical  axis  moves  in a particular  direction 
and the other  end moves  in opposite  direction. 
The transverse  axis  of movement  is almost 
fixed.  The resultant  movement  is rolling  along 
an arc. Rolling  and sliding  occur  together  in knee  joint. 
Joint  Positions 
Close  packed  position:  When  the joint  surfaces  become  completely 
congruent,  their  area  of contact  is maximal  and  they  are tightly 
compressed. 
In this  position  fibrous  capsule  and  ligaments  are maximally 
spiralized  and tense;  no further  movement  is possible;  surfaces  cannot 
be separated  by disruptive  forces;  articular  surfaces  are liable  to trauma 
(Table  3.1). 
Table  3.1:  Close  packed  positions  of the joints 
Joint Close  packed  position 
Temporomandibular Clenched  teeth 
Spine Extension 
Shoulder Abduction  and  lateral  rotation 
Elbow Extension 
Wrist Extension  with  radial  deviation 
Trapeziometacarpal None 
Metacarpophalangeal • Metacarpophalangeal  flexion  (finger) 
and • Opposition  (thumb) 
Interphalangeal • Interphalangeal  extension 
Hip Extension  and  medial  rotation 
Knee Extension  with  locking 
Ankle Dorsiflexion 
Subtalar  and  mid-tarsal Inversion 
Metatarsophalangeal  and Metatarsophalangeal  extension 
interphalangeal Interphalangeal  extension 
Joints  I 75 
Loose  packed:  All other  positions  of incongruency. 
Examples:  Least  packed  position. 
Shoulder  - semiabduction 
Hip - semiflexion 
Knee  - semiflexion 
Ankle  - plantar  flexion. 
Limitation  of Movement 
Factors 
• Reflex  contraction  of antagonistic  muscles. 
• Due  to stimulations  of mechanoreceptors  in articular  tissue. 
• Ligaments  tension; 
• Approximation  of soft  parts. 
MECHANISM  OF LUBRICATION  OF A SYNOVIAL  JOINT 
1. Synovial  fluid,  secreted  by synovial  membrane,  is sticky  and 
viscous  due to hyaluronic  acid  (a mucopolysaccharide).  It serves 
the main  function  of lubrication  of the joint,  but also  nourishes 
the articular  cartilage. 
2. Hyaline  cartilage  covering  the articular  surfaces  possesses 
inherent  slipperiness,  like  that  of the ice. 
3. Intra-articular  fibrocartilages,  articular  discs  or menisci, 
complete  or incomplete,  help  in spreading  the synovial  fluid 
throughout  the joint  cavity,  but particularly  between  the articular 
surfaces,  e.g. temporomandibular  joint  (Fig.  3.15). 
4. Haversian  fatty  pads  (Haversian  glands)  occupy  extra  spaces 
in the joint  cavity  between  the incongruous  bony  surfaces.  All of 
them  are covered  with  synovial  membrane,  and perhaps  function 
as swabs  to spread  the synovial  fluid. 
5. Bursa  is a synovial  fluid  filled  bag in relation  to joints  and bones, 
to prevent  friction.  The  inflammation  of bursa  is called  bursitis. 
BLOOD  SUPPLY  OF SYNOVIAL  JOINTS 
The articular  and  epiphysial  branches  given  off by the neighbouring 
arteries  form  a periarticular  arterial  plexus.  Numerous  vessels  from 
76 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
this plexus  pierce  the fibrous  capsule  and form  a rich vascular  plexus 
in the deeper  parts  of synovial  membrane.  The  blood  vessels  of the 
synovial  membrane  terminate  around  the articular  margins  in a fringe 
of looped  anastomoses  termed  the circulus  vasculosus  (circulus 
articularis  vasculosus).  It supplies  capsule,  synovial  membrane,  and 
the epiphysis.  The  articular  cartilage  is avascular. 
After  epiphysial  fusion,  communications  between  circulus 
vasculosus  and  the end  arteries  of metaphysis  are established,  thus 
minimizing  the chances  of osteomyelitis  in the metaphysis. 
NERVE  SUPPLY  OF SYNOVIAL  JOINTS 
1. The  capsule  and  ligaments  possess  a rich  nerve  supply,  which 
makes  them  acutely  sensitive  to pain.  The  synovial  membrane 
has a poor  nerve  supply  and is relatively  insensitive  to pain.  The 
articular  cartilage  is non-nervous  and totally  insensitive. 
Articular  nerves  contain  sensory  and autonomic  fibres. 
Some  of the sensory  fibres  are proprioceptive  in nature;  these  are 
sensitive  to position  and movement,  and are concerned  with  the 
reflex  control  of posture  and  locomotion.  Other  sensory  fibres 
are sensitive  to pain. 
Autonomic  fibres  are vasomotor  or vasosensory. 
The joint  pain  is often  diffuse,  and may  be associated  with  nausea, 
vomiting,  slowing  of pulse,  and fall in blood  pressure. 
The pain  commonly  causes  reflex  contraction  of muscles  which 
fix the joint  in a position  of maximum  comfort.  Like  visceral 
pain,  the joint  pain  is also  referred  to uninvolved  joints. 
2. The  principles  of distribution  of nerves  to joints  were  first 
described  by Hilton  (1891).  Hilton's  law  states  that a motor  nerve 
to the muscle  acting  on joint  tends  to give  a branch  to that joint 
(capsule)  and another  branch  to the skin  covering  the joint. 
The concept  of innervation  of a joint  was  further  elucidated  by 
Gardner  (1948)  who  observed  that each  nerve  innervates  a specific 
region  of the capsule,  and that  the part  of the capsule  which  is 
rendered  taut  by a given  muscle  is innervated  by the nerve 
supplying  its antagonists.  Thus  the pattern  of innervation  is 
concerned  with  the maintenance  of an efficient  stability  at the 
joint. 
Joints  I 77 
LYMPHATIC  DRAINAGE  OF SYNOVIAL  JOINTS 
Lymphatics  form  a plexus  in the subintima  of the synovial  membrane, 
and drain  along  the blood  vessels  to the regional  deep  nodes. 
STABILITY  OF SYNOVIAL  JOINTS 
The various  factors  maintaining  stability  at a joint  are described  here 
in order  of their  importance. 
1. Muscles:  The  tone  of different  groups  of muscles  acting  on the 
joint  is the most  important  and indispensable  factor  in maintaining 
the stability.  Without  muscles,  the knee  and  shoulder  would  be 
unstable,  and arches  of the foot  would  collapse. 
2. Ligaments:  Are important  in preventing  any over-movement,  and 
in guarding  against  sudden  accidental  stresses.  However,  they  do 
not help  against  a continuous  strain,  because  once  stretched,  they 
tend to remain  elongated.  In this  respect  the elastic  ligaments 
(ligamenta  flava  and ligaments  of the joints  of auditory  ossicles) 
are superior  to the common  type  of white  fibrous  ligaments. 
3. Bones:  Help  in maintaining  stability  only  in firm  type  of joints, 
like the hip and ankle.  Otherwise  in most  of the joints  (shoulder, 
knee,  sacroiliac,  etc.)  their  role  is negligible. 
CLINICAL  ANATOMY 
• Intervertebral  disc  forms  secondary  cartilaginous  joint  between  the 
bodies  of the vertebrae.  If the nucleus  pulposus  part  of the disc  gets 
protruded  backwards,  it may  press  on the spinal  nerve  leaving  out 
from  the intervertebral  foramina.  The  condition  is known  as 
herniation  of the disc  or disc  prolapse.  If disc  prolapse  occurs  in 
lumbar  or sacral  nerves,  there  is radiating  pain  in the lower  limb, 
then the condition  is called  sciatica  (Fig.  3.21). 
• The joints  may  get dislocated,  i.e. the end of one of the bones  gets 
out of its socket.  In subluxation,  the end of the bone  partially  leaves 
its socket  (Fig.  3.22). 
• Rheumatic  fever  causes  fleeting  pain  in the joints,  accompanied  by 
streptococcal  pharyngitis.  It is mostly  temporary  pain  in the joints. 
The toxins  of the bacteria  may  affect  the mitral  valve  of the heart  or 
the kidneys. 
78 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
• Rheumatoid  arthritis  is an inflammatory  systemic  disease  involving 
the synovial  membranes  of small  joints  of the hands.  Due  to chronic 
inflammatory  process  there  is deformity  of the fingers  (Fig.  3.23). 
• Osteoarthritis  is a degenerative  condition  of the large  weight-  bearing 
joints.  The  articular  cartilage  wears  out,  degenerates  and  there  is 
formation  of peripheral  osteophytes.  The  patients  feels  lots of pain 
due to rubbing  of the bones  together  during  movements  of the joints 
(Fig.  3.24). 
• The degenerative  changes  or spondylitis  may  occur  in the cervical 
spine,  leading  to narrowed  intervertebral  foramen,  causing  pressure 
on the spinal  nerve  (Fig.  3.25). Fig. 3.21:  Disc  prolapse  leading  to sciatica 
Fig. 3.22:  (a) Subluxation,  (b) Dislocation (a) (b) 
Joints  79 
Fig. 3.25:  Spondylitis (a) (b) (c) 
Fig. 3.23:  Changes  in rheumatoid  arthritis  with  clinical  features 
(a) (b) 
Fig. 3.24:  Osteoarthritis 
^ Bony 
changes 
80 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Table  3.2.  Comparison  of Osteoarthritis  and  Rheumatoid  arthritis 
Age and  joints Disorder  and 
initial  damage Systemic 
disease 
Osteoarthritis Middle  age, 
single  large  weight 
bearing  joint Degenerative, 
articular  cartilage None 
ESR - normal, 
Rheumatoid 
factor  absent 
Rheumatoid 
arthritis Any age,  multiple 
small  joints  of hands 
and feet Inflammatory, 
synovial 
membrane Systemic 
disease, 
ESR - raised, 
Anaemia  + 
Rheumatoid 
factor  present 
• There  may  be injury  to various  structures  in the joints.  At times  the 
medial  meniscus  of the knee  joint  may  get injured.  In that  case  it 
needs  to be removed  (Fig.  3.26). 
• The metaphysis,  the end of diaphysis  or shaft  is the actively  growing 
end of the bone.  In some  joints,  the capsule  encloses  the metaphysis 
as well.  In such  joints,  infection  from  metaphysis  would  reach  the 
joint  cavity  and cause  septic  arthritis  (Fig.  3.27). 
• There  may  be fracture  into  the joint  space  leading  to collection  of 
blood  and  broken  pieces  of ends  of the bones  in the joint  cavity 
(Fig.  3.28). 
• If joints  have  been  diseased  for a very  long  time  with  no hope  of 
recovery,  these  can be replaced.  The X-rays  shows  replaced  hip joints 
and knee  joint  (Figs  3.29  and 3.30). Fig. 3.26:  Injury  to medial  meniscus 
Joints  I 81 
Fig. 3.28:  Injury  to a joint Fig. 3.27:  Intracapsular  metaphysis  (black  areas) 
Fig. 3.29:  Right  hip joint  replaced  Fig.  3.30:  Both  knee  joints  replaced 
Courtesy:  Dr. Naresh  Chand,  Senior  Consultant,  Department  of Orthopaedics, 
Narendra  Mohan  Hospital,  Mohan  Nagar,  Ghazlabad. 
• Stiffness  of joints  related  to weather.  The  viscosity  of synovial  fluid 
increases  with  fall in temperature.  This  accounts  for stiffness  of the 
joints  in cold  weather.  Mobility  of joint  in itself  is an important 
factor  in promoting  lubrication.  Thus  the stiffness  of joints 
experienced  in the morning  gradually  passes  off as the movements 
are resumed. 
• Neuropathic  joint  is the result  of its complete  denervation,  so that 
all reflexes  are eliminated  and the joint  is left unprotected  and liable 
to mechanical  damage.  A neuropathic  joint  shows  painless  swelling, 
excessive  mobility  and bony  destruction.  It is commonly  caused  by 
leprosy,  tabes  dorsalis  and syringomyelia. 82 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Derivation  of Name 
Muscles  (L. Mus  = mouse)  are so named  because,  many  of them 
resemble  a mouse,  with  their  tendons  representing  the tail. 
Definition 
Muscle  is a contractile  tissue  which  brings  about  movements.  Muscles 
can be regarded  as motors  of the body. 
Types  of Muscles 
The muscles  are of three  types,  skeletal,  smooth  and  cardiac.  The 
characters  of each  type  are summarized  in Table  4.1. 
SKELETAL  MUSCLES 
Synonyms 
1. Striped  muscles 
2. Striated  muscles 
3. Somatic  muscles 
4. Voluntary  muscles 
PARTS  OF A MUSCLE 
A. Two  ends 
1. Origin  is one end of the muscle  which  remains  fixed  during  its 
contraction. 
2. Insertion  is the other  end which  moves  during  its contraction.  In 
the limb  muscles,  the origin  is usually  proximal  to insertion. Muscles 
84 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Table  4.1.  Types  of Muscles 
Striated Non-striated Cardiac 
1. Striated  muscles  are 
present  in the limbs, 
body  wall,  tongue, 
pharynx  and  beginning 
of oesophagus 
(Fig. 4.1) 
2. Long  and  cylindrical 
3. Fibres  unbranched 
4. Multinucleated 
5. Bounded  by 
sarcolemma 
6. Light  and  dark 
bands  present 
7. No intercalated 
disc 
8. Nerve  supply  from 
cranial  nervous 
system 
9. Blood  supply  is 
abundant 
10. Very  rapid  contraction 
11. They  soon  get 
fatigued 
12. Voluntary Oesophagus  (distal 
part),  urogenital  tract, 
urinary  bladder,  blood 
vessels,  iris of eye, 
arrector  pilli muscle 
of hair  (Fig.  4.2) 
Spindle  shaped 
Fibres  unbranched 
Uninucleated 
Bounded  by plasma-
lemma 
Light  and  dark  bands 
absent 
No intercalated  discs 
Nerve  supply  from 
autonomic  nervous 
system 
Blood  supply  is scanty 
Slow  contraction 
They  do not get 
fatigued 
Involuntary Wall of heart 
(Fig. 4.3) 
Short  and  cylindrical 
Fibres  branched 
Uninucleated 
Bounded  by plasma-
lemma 
Faint  light  and  dark 
bands  present 
Intercalated  disc 
present  and  a 
characteristic 
feature 
Nerve  supply  from 
autonomic  nervous 
system 
Blood  supply  is 
abundant 
Rapid  contractions 
They  never  get 
fatigued 
Involuntary 
Fig. 4.1:  Skeletal  / Striated  muscle y^ Peripheral-. 
nuclei 
Biceps  brachii 
Triceps  brachii - Muscle  fibre 
Muscles 1 85 
Nucleus 
Fig. 4.2.  Smooth  / Non-striated  muscle 
Fig. 4.3:  Cardiac  muscle 
However,  the terms,  origin  and insertion,  are at times  interchangeable 
(e.g. climbing  action  of latissimus  dorsi),  and at other  times  difficult 
to define,  as in the intercostal  muscles. 
B. Two  parts 
1. Fleshy  part  is contractile,  and is called  the 'belly'. 
2. Fibrous  part  is noncontractile  and inelastic.  When  cord-like  or 
rope-like,  it is called  tendon  (Fig.  4.4);  when  flattened,  it is called 
aponeurosis. Branching  -
muscle  fibre 
Intercalated  disc  -
Heart 
86 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Flexor  pollicis  longus 
Tendon  of flexor 
pollicis  longus 
Terminal  phalanx Flexor  digitorum 
profundus 
Tendons  of flexor 
digitorum  profundus 
Fig. 4.4:  Tendons 
STRUCTURE  OF STRIATED  MUSCLE 
A. Contractile  tissue 
Each  muscle  is composed  of numerous  muscle  fibres.  Each  muscle 
fibre  is a multinucleated,  cross-striated  cylindrical  cell  (myocyte) 
1-300  mm long.  It is made  up of sarcolemma  (cell  membrane)  enclosing 
sarcoplasm  (cytoplasm). 
Embedded  in the sarcoplasm  there  are (a) several  hundred  of nuclei 
arranged  at the periphery  beneath  the sarcolemma  and (b) a number  of 
evenly  distributed  longitudinal  threads  called  myofibrils.  Each  myofibril 
shows  alternate  dark  and  light  bands.  Dark  bands  are known  as A 
bands  (anistropic)  and the light  bands  as I bands  (isotropic).  The  bands 
of adjacent  fibrils  are aligned  transversely  so that  the muscle  fibre 
appears  cross-striated.  In the middle  of dark  band  there  is a light  H 
band  with  M band  (dark),  in its middle.  In the middle  of I band  there  is 
a dark  Z disc  or Krause's  membrane,  the segment  of myofibril  between 
two Z discs  is called  sarcomere  (Fig.  4.5). 
Muscles 1 87 
I band 
Z line Sarcomere 
A band 
H band  • 
Thick 
filament I band 
Thin 
filament Z line 
Fig. 4.5:  A sarcomere  in skeletal  muscle  between  two Z lines 
B. Supporting  tissue 
It helps  in organization  of the muscle.  Endomysium  surrounds  each 
muscle  fibre  separately.  Perimysium  surrounds  bundles  (fasciculi  or 
myonemes)  of muscle  fibres  of various  sizes.  Epimysium  surrounds 
the entire  muscle.  The  connective  tissue  of the muscle  becomes 
continuous  with  the tendon  (Fig.  4.6). 
Slow  and  Fast  Muscle  Fibres  (Dubowitz,  1969;  Gauthier  and 
Schaeffer,  1974) 
plate Nerve 
Epimysium 
Perimysium 
Endomysium Motor  end 
Fig. 4.6:  Supporting  tissue 
88 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
1. Type  I (slow)  fibres 
Show  a slow  'tonic'  contraction  characteristic  of postural  muscles. 
These  are red in colour  because  of large  amounts  of myoglobin. 
The fibres  are rich  in mitochondria  and oxidative  enzymes,  but 
poor  in phosphorylases. 
Because  of a well-developed  aerobic  metabolism,  slow  fibres  are 
highly  resistant  to fatigue. 
2. Type  II (fast)  fibres 
Show  a fast  'phasic'  contraction  required  for  large-scale 
movements  of body  segments. 
These  are paler  (white)  in colour  because  of small  amounts  of 
myoglobin.  The  fibres  are rich  in glycogen  and phosphorylases, 
but poor  in mitochondria  and oxidative  enzymes. 
Because  of a glycolytic  respiration,  the fast fibres  are quite  easily 
fatigued. 
3. Intermediate  fibres 
Represent  a variant  of type  II (fast)  fibres  which  are relatively 
resistant  to fatigue,  although  less than  type  I (slow)  fibres  (Burke 
etal,  1973). 
In man,  most  of the skeletal  muscles  show  a mixture  of fibre  types, 
but any one type  may  predominate. 
Fascicular  Architecture  of Muscles 
The arrangement  of muscle  fibres  varies  according  to the direction, 
force  and range  of habitual  movement  at a particular  joint.  The  force 
of movement  is directly  proportional  to the number  and size  of muscle 
fibres,  and the range  of movement  is proportional  to the length  of fibres. 
The muscles  can be classified  according  to the arrangement  of their 
fasciculi  into  the following  groups  (Fig.  4.7). 
A. Parallel  Fasciculi 
When  the fasciculi  are parallel  to the line of pull,  the muscle  may  be : 
1. Quadrilateral  (thyrohyoid), 
2. Strap-like  (sternohyoid  and  sartorius). 
3. Strap-like  with  tendinous  intersections  (rectus  abdominis). 
4. Fusiform  (biceps  brachii,  digastric,  etc.).  The range  of movement 
in such  muscles  is maximum  (Fig.  4.7). 
Muscles 1 89 
Rectus  abdominis  with  tendinous 
intersections Two heads 
of origin Xiphoid 
process 
Rectus 
abdominis 
Tendinous 
intersections 
Umbilicus Circumpennate  Bipennate 
(tibialis  anterior)  (dorsal  interosseous) 
Fig. 4.7:  Fascicular  architecture  of muscles 
B. Oblique  Fasciculi 
When  the fasciculi  are oblique  to the line  of pull,  the muscle  may  be 
triangular,  or pennate  (feather-like)  in the construction.  This 
arrangement  makes  the muscle  more  powerful,  although  the range  of 
movement  is reduced.  Oblique  arrangements  are of the following  types: Orbicularis  oculi Quadriceps  femoris 
Triceps  brachii Biceps  brachii 
Digastric 
90 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
1. Triangular,  e.g.  temporalis,  adductor  longus. 
2. Unipennate,  e.g. flexor  pollicis  longus,  extensor  digitorum  longus, 
peroneus  tertius,  palmar  interossei  (Fig.  4.8). 
3. Bipennate,  e.g.  rectus  femoris,  dorsal  interossei  (Fig.  4.7), 
peroneus  longus,  flexor  hallucis  longus. 
4. Multipennate,  e.g.  subscapularis,  deltoid  (acromial  fibres) 
(Fig.  4.8). 
5. Circumpennate,  e.g.  tibialis  anterior  (Fig.  4.7). 
Deltoid  tuberosity 
(b) Multipennate-deltoid Posterior  fibres Anterior  fibres 
of deltoid Spine  of scapula 
Clavicle 
Intermuscular  septum 
of insertion Intermuscular 
septum  of origin (a) Unipennate-palmar  interossei 
Acromion 
Fig. 4.8:  Oblique  fasciculi 
Muscles 1 91 
C. Spiral  or Twisted  Fasciculi 
Spiral  or twisted  fibres  are  found  in trapezius,  pectoralis  major, 
latissimus  dorsi,  supinator,  etc.  (Fig.  4.9).  In certain  muscles  the 
fasciculi  are crossed.  These  are  called  cruciate  muscles,  e.g. 
sternocleido-mastoid,  masseter,  and adductor  magnus. 
Nomenclature  of Muscles 
The muscles  have  been  named  in a number  of ways. 
1. According  to their  shape,  e.g.  trapezius,  rhomboideus,  serratus 
anterior  (Fig.  4.10),  latissimus  dorsi,  etc. 
2. According  to the number  of heads  of origin,  e.g. biceps,  triceps 
(Fig.  4.11),  quadriceps  (Fig.  4.7),  digastric,  etc. 
3. According  to their  gross  structure,  e.g.  semitendinosus,  semi-
membranosus,  etc. (Fig.  4.12). 
4. According  to their  location,  e.g.  temporalis  (Fig.  4.13),  supra-
spinatus,  intercostales. 
5. According  to their  attachments,  e.g.  stylohyoid,  cricothyroid 
(Fig.  4.14),  etc. 
6. According  to their  action,  e.g.  adductor  longus,  flexor  carpi 
ulnaris  (Fig.  4.15),  abductor  pollicis  longus,  etc. orbicularis  oculi 
7. According  to direction  of their  fibres,  e.g.  rectus  abdominis, 
transversus  abdominis,  orbicularis  oculi  (Fig.  4.7). 
8. A muscle  with  two  bellies  with  an intervening  tendon  is called 
digastric  muscle  (Fig.  4.7).  Muscle  with  number  of intervening 
tendons  or intersections  is the rectus  abdominis. Fig. 4.9:  Spiral  fasciculi:  Latissimus  dorsi 
(Fig.  4.7). 
I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Fig. 4.10:  Serratus  anterior  muscle 
Fig. 4.11:  Triceps  brachii First rib 
• Eighth  rib 
Lateral  head 
- Medial  head Long  head  -
Muscles 1 93 
Fig. 4.12:  According  to gross  structure:  Semitendinosus 
Fig. 4.13:  According  to shape:  Temporalis 
Thyroid  cartilage 
Cricothyroid  muscle Cricoid  cartilage Biceps  femoris 
Popliteal  fossa 
Plantaris 
Lateral  head  of 
gastrocnemius 
Medial  head  of 
gastrocnemius Semimembranosus 
Semitendinosus 
Fig. 4.14:  According  to attachment:  Cricothyroid 
94 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
The muscles  that extend  over  two or more  joints  are called  diarthric 
orpolyarthric  muscles,  e.g. flexor  carpi  radialis  (Fig.  4.15)  and flexor 
digitorum  profundus  (Fig.  4.4). 
Common  flexor  origin 
Pronator  teres 
Flexor  carpi  ulnaris 
Palmaris  longus 
Flexor  carpi  radialis 
Flexor  digitorum  superficialis 
Flexor  retinaculum 
Palmar  aponeurosis 
Fig. 4.15:  Muscles  named  according  to action 
NERVE  SUPPLY  OF SKELETAL  MUSCLE 
The nerve  supplying  a muscle  is called  motor  nerve.  In fact  it is a 
mixed  nerve  and consists  of the following  types  of fibres. 
1. Motor  fibres  (60%)  comprise: 
(a) Large  myelinated  alpha  efferents  which  supply  extrafusal 
muscle  fibres  (Fig.  4.16). 
(b) Smaller  myelinated  gamma  efferents  which  supply  intrafusal 
fibres  of the muscle  spindles  which  refine  and control  muscle 
contraction. 
(c) The  fine  non-myelinated  autonomic  efferents  which  supply 
smooth  muscle  fibres  of the blood  vessels. 
2. Sensory  fibres  (40%)  comprise:  Myelinated  fibres  distributed 
to muscle  spindles  for proprioception,  also  to tendons. 
Muscle  spindles  are spindle-shaped  sensory  end  organs  of the 
skeletal  muscle.  Each  spindle  contains  6-14  intrafusal  muscle  fibres 
Muscles 1 95 
which  are to two types,  the larger  nuclear  bag  fibres,  and the smaller 
nuclear  chain  fibres  (Fig.  4.16).  The  spindle  is innervated  by both  the 
sensory  and motor  nerves.  The  sensory  endings  are of two types,  the 
primary  sensory  endings  (annulospiral  endings)  around  the central 
nuclear  region  of the intrafusal  fibres,  and  the secondary  sensory 
endings  (flower  spray  endings)  beyond  the nuclear  region  on either 
side of these  fibres. 
Alpha 
Gamma  efferent V 
Extrafusal  fibres Group  A (thick) 
afferent  \ ^ Nuclear  bag  fibre  1 |ntrafusal  fibres 
Nuclear  chain  fibre  J 
Primary  sensory  endings 
Secondary  sensory  endings 
Motor  endings 
Capsule  of muscle  spindle 
Fig. 4.16:  Nerve  supply  of skeletal  muscle 
The motor  nerve  supply  of the spindle  is derived  from  gamma  motor 
neurons  of the spinal  cord.  Muscles  spindles  act as stretch  receptors. 
They  record  and help  regulate  the degree  and rate of contraction  of the 
extrafusal  fibres  by influencing  the alpha  neurons. 
Motor  point  is the site where  the motor  nerve  enters  the muscle.  It 
may be one or more  than  one.  Electrical  stimulation  at the motor  point 
is more  effective. 
Motor  unit  (myone)  is defined  as a single  alpha  motor  neuron 
together  with  the muscle  fibres  supplied  by it. The  size  of motor  unit 
depends  upon  the precision  of muscle  control.  Small  motor  units 
(5-10  muscle  fibres)  are found  in muscles  of fine  movements  (extra-
ocular  muscles).  Large  motor  units  (100-2000  muscle  fibres)  are found 
in muscles  of gross  movements  (proximal  limb  muscles). 
Composite/hybrid  muscle:  Muscle  supplied  by two different  motor 
nerves  with  different  root values  is called  a composite  or hybrid  muscle, 
e.g. adductor  magnus,  flexor  digitorum  profundus  and pectoralis  major. 
96 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Nerve  Supply  of Smooth  Muscle 
According  to nerve  supply  the smooth  muscles  are classified  into: 
Single-unit  type:  Seen  in intestines.  The  nerve  impulse  reaches 
one muscle  cell,  is transmitted  to other  cells  by the mechanical  pull 
through  the fused  cell membrane.  The  nerve  supply  is sparse. 
Multi-unit  type:  Seen  in the muscles  of the ductus  deferens.  Each 
muscle  cell  receives  a separate  nerve  fibre.  The  contraction  is 
simultaneous.  The  nerve  supply  is rich  (Fig.  4.17). 
Nerve  Supply  of Cardiac  Muscle 
Heart  is supplied  by sympathetic  and  parasympathetic  nerve  fibres. 
Sympathetic  nerves  stimulate  both  the heart  rate  and  blood  pressure 
and dilate  the coronary  arteries.  The  sensory  fibres  convey  painful 
impulses  from  heart. 
Parasympathetic  fibres  decrease  the heart  rate.  Their  sensory  fibres 
are involved  with  visceral  reflexes. 
ACTIONS  OF MUSCLES 
1. Broadly,  when  a muscle  contracts,  it shortens  by one-third  (30%) 
of its belly-length,  and  brings  about  a movement.  The  range  of Spinal  nervf 
Group  of 
muscle  fibres 
Fig. 4.17:  Nerve  supply  of smooth  muscle Anterior 
nerve  root 
Nerve  fibre 
(axon) Cell body  of 
a motor  neuron 
Muscles 1 97 
movement  depends  on the length  of fleshy  fibres,  and the power 
or force  of movement  on the number  of fibres. 
However,  the actual  behaviour  of muscle  contraction  is more 
complex. 
During  contraction  the length  of the muscle  may  decrease 
(isotonic  contraction). 
May remain  unchanged  (isometric  contraction). 
May increase,  according  to the functional  demands  of the body. 
In each  circumstance  the tension  generated  at the ends  may  either 
increase,  persist,  or decrease,  depending  upon  the number  and state 
of its active  motor  units  and the external  conditions  like  loading. 
2. Each  movement  at a joint  is brought  about  by a coordinated 
activity  of different  groups  of muscles.  These  muscle  groups  are 
classified  and named  according  to their  function. 
(a) Prime  movers  (agonists)  bring  about  the desired  movement. 
When  a prime  mover  helps  opposite  action  by active 
controlled  lengthening  against  gravity,  it is known  as action 
of paradox.  For  example,  putting  a glass  back  on the table  is 
assisted  by gravity  but  controlled  by a gradual  active 
lengthening  of biceps  (paradoxical  or eccentric  action). 
(b) Antagonists  (opponents)  oppose  the prime  movers.  They 
help the prime  movers  by active  controlled  relaxation,  so that 
the desired  movement  is smooth  and  precise.  Thus,  the 
antagonists  cooperate  rather  than  oppose  the prime  movers.  This 
is due to reciprocal  innervation  ofthe  opposite  groups  of muscles, 
regulated  by the spinal  cord  through  stretch  reflex  (Fig.  4.18). 
(c) Fixators  are the groups  of muscles  which  stabilize  the proximal 
joints  of a limb,  so that the desired  movement  at the distal  joint 
may occur  on a fixed  base.  Muscles  acting  on shoulder  joint 
fix it for better  movement  of fingers. 
(d) Synergists:  When  the prime  movers  cross  more  than  one 
joint,  the undesired  actions  at the proximal  joints  are prevented 
by certain  muscles  known  as synergists.  For example,  during 
making  a tight  fist by long  digital  flexors  the wrist  is kept 
fixed  in extension  by the synergists  (extensors  of wrist).  Thus, 
the synergists  are special  fixators  and partial  antagonists  to 
the prime  movers. 
Two or more  muscles  causing  one  movement  are synergist 
(Fig.  4.15). 
98 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
CLINICAL  ANATOMY 
• Paralysis 
Loss  of motor  power  (power  of movement)  is called  paralysis.  This 
is due to inability  of the muscles  to contract,  caused  either  by damage 
to the motor  neural  pathways  (upper  or lower  motor  neuron),  or by 
the inherent  disease  of muscles  (myopathy).  Damage  to the upper 
motor  neuron  causes  spastic  paralysis  with  exaggerated  tendon  jerks. 
Damage  to the lower  motor  neuron  causes  flaccid  paralysis  with 
loss of tendon  jerks. 
• Muscular  spasm 
These  are quite  painful.  Localized  muscle  spasm  is commonly  caused 
by a 'muscle  pull'.  In order  to relieve  its pain  the muscle  should  be 
relaxed  by appropriate  treatment.  Generalized  muscle  spasms  occur 
in tetanus  and epilepsy. 1a fibre  -
Muscle  spindle— 
Rectus  femoris— 
Semitendinosus 
antagonist  muscle 
Fig. 4.18:  Reciprocal  innervation  of prime  mover  and  antagonist 
Muscles 1 99 
• Disuse  atrophy  and  hypertrophy 
The muscles  which  are not used  for long  times  become  thin  and 
weak.  This  is called  disuse  atrophy.  Conversely,  adequate  or 
excessive  use of particular  muscles  causes  their  better  development, 
or even  hypertrophy  (Fig.  1.2).  Muscular  'wasting'  (reduction  in 
size)  is a feature  of lower  motor  neuron  paralysis  and generalized 
debility. 
•Regeneration  of skeletal  muscle 
Skeletal  muscle  is capable  of limited  regeneration.  If large  regions 
are damaged,  regeneration  does  not occur  and the missing  muscle  is 
replaced  by connective  tissue. 
• Hyperplasia 
Increase  in number  of smooth  muscle  fibres.  Usually  occurs  in uterus 
during  pregnancy. 
• Myasthenia  gravis  is an autoimmune  disease  of muscle  of unknown 
origin.  Antibodies  are produced  that  bind  to acetylcholine  receptor 
and block  it. The  nerve  impulse  transmission  to muscle  fibres  is 
therefore  blocked.  This  leads  to extensive  and progressive  muscle 
weakness  although  the muscles  are normal.  Extraocular  and eyelid 
muscles  are affected  first,  followed  by those  of the neck  and limbs. 
It affects  more  women  that  men  and usually  those  between  age of 
20 and 40 years. 
• Polymyositis  is a disease  of muscle  characterized  by inflammation 
of the muscle  fibres.  It starts  when  white  blood  cells  (immune  cells 
of inflammation)  spontaneously  invade  the muscle.  Muscles  close 
to trunk  or torso  are mostly  affected  by polymyositis  that  results  in 
severe  weakness.  Polymyositis  associated  with  skin  rash  is referred 
to as "dermamyositis". 
• Fibrillation  is the abnormal  contraction  of cardiac  muscle.  The 
cardiac  chambers  do not contract  as a whole  resulting  in the 
disruption  of pumping  action.  In atrial  fibrillation,  there  is rapid 
and uncoordinated  contraction  of atria,  ineffective  pumping  and 
abnormal  contraction  of the AV node.  Ventricular  fibrillation  is 
characterized  by very  rapid  and disorganized  contraction  of ventricle. 
This leads  to disruption  of ventricular  function. 
• Angina  pectoris  is episode  of chest  pain  due to temporary  ischaemia 
of cardiac  muscle.  It is usually  relieved  by rest and nitrites. 
100 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
• Myocardial  ischaemia 
Persistent  ischaemia  due to blockage  of more  than  one arteries  results 
in necrosis  (death)  of the cardiac  muscle  (Fig.  4.19).  Pain,  not 
relieved  by rest,  gets  referred  to left arm,  chest,  and neigbhouring 
areas. 
Fig. 4.19:  Myocardial  ischaemia 
5 
Cardiovascular  System 
Cardiovascular  system  is the transport  system  of the body,  through 
which  the nutrients  are conveyed  to places  where  these  are utilized, 
and the metabolites  (waste  products)  are conveyed  to appropriate  places 
from  where  these  are expelled. 
The conveying  medium  is a liquid  tissue,  the blood,  which  flows  in 
tubular  channels  called  blood  vessels.  The  circulation  is maintained 
by the central  pumping  organ  called  the heart. 
COMPONENTS 
Cardiovascular  system  is a closed  system  of tubes  made  up of the 
following  parts  based  on their  structural  and  topographical 
characteristics  (Fig.  5.1). 
Fig.  5.1:  Heart Superior-
vena  cava 
Ascending  aorta  -
Right  atrium  -
Right  ventricle  -- Left auricle 
-Pulmonary  trunk 
Apex 
102 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
1. Heart:  It is a four-chambered  muscular  organ  which  pumps  blood 
to various  parts  of the body.  Each  half  of the heart  has a receiving 
chamber  called  atrium,  and  a pumping  chamber  called  ventricle. 
2. Arteries:  These  are distributing  channels  which  carry  blood  away 
from  the heart. 
(a) They  branch  like  trees  on their  way  to different  parts  of the 
body. 
(b) The  large  arteries  are rich  in elastic  tissue,  but as branching 
progresses  there  is an ever-increasing  amount  of smooth 
muscle  in their  walls. 
(c) The  minute  branches  which  are just visible  to naked  eye are 
called  arterioles. 
(d) Angeion  is a Greek  word,  meaning  a vessel  (blood  vessel  or 
lymph  vessel).  Its word  derivatives  are  angiology, 
angiography,  haemangioma,  and thromboangitis  obliterans. 
3. Veins:  These  are draining  channels  which  carry  blood  from 
different  parts  of the body  back  to the heart. 
(a) Like  rivers,  the veins  are formed  by tributaries. 
(b) The  small  veins  (venules)  join  together  to form  larger  veins, 
which  in turn  unite  to form  great  veins  called  venae  cavae 
(Fig.  5.2). 
Fig. 5.2:  Artery  and  vein I Capillaries 
Artery 
Valve  in the vein 
Cardiovascular  System  I 103 
Capillaries:  These  are networks  of microscopic  vessels  which 
connect  arterioles  with  the venules. 
• These  come  in intimate  contact  with  the tissues  for a free  exchange 
of nutrients  and  metabolites  across  their  walls  between  the blood 
and the tissue  fluid. 
• The metabolites  are partly  drained  by the capillaries  and partly  by 
lymphatics. 
• Capillaries  are replaced  by sinusoids  in certain  organs,  like liver  and 
spleen. 
Functionally,  the blood  vessels  can be classified  into  the following 
five groups. 
(a) Distributing  vessels,  including  arteries; 
(b) Resistance  vessels,  including  arterioles  and  precapillary 
sphincters; 
(c) Exchange  vessels,  including  capillaries,  sinusoids,  and 
postcapillary  venules; 
(d) Reservoir  (capacitance)  vessels,  including  larger  venules  and 
veins;  and 
(e) Shunts,  including  various  types  of anastomoses. 
Types  of Circulation  of Blood 
Systemic  (greater)  circulation:  The blood  flows  from  the left ventricle, 
through  various  parts  of the body,  to the right  atrium,  i.e. from  the left 
to the right  side  of the heart  (Fig.  5.3). 
Pulmonary  (lesser)  circulation:  The  blood  flows  from  the right 
ventricle,  through  the lungs,  to the left atrium,  i.e. from  the right  to the 
left side  of the heart. 
Portal  circulation:  It is a part  of systemic  circulation,  which  has 
the following  characteristics. 
(a) The  blood  passes  through  two sets of capillaries  before  draining 
into a systemic  vein. 
(b) The  vein  draining  the first  capillary  network  is known  as portal 
vein which  branches  like  an artery  to form  the second  set of 
capillaries  or sinusoids.  Examples:  hepatic  portal  circulation 
hypothalamo  hypophyseal  portal  circulation  and  renal  portal 
circulation  (Fig.  5.3). 
104 i Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
ARTERIES 
Characteristic  Features 
1. Arteries  are thick-walled,  being  uniformly  thicker  than  the 
accompanying  veins,  except  for the arteries  within  the cranium 
and vertebral  canal  where  these  are thin. 
2. Their  lumen  is smaller  than  that  of the accompanying  veins. 
3. Arteries  have  no valves. 
4. An artery  is usually  accompanied  by vein(s)  and  nerve(s),  and 
the three  of them  together  form  the neurovascular  bundle  which 
is surrounded  and supported  by a fibroareolar  sheath. Head 
Trunk,  arms 
Bronchial 
Vena  Cava Aorta PA / 
\ ^  Portal  ^mm^ 
Liver  vein  Gastrointestinal 
tract 
l^iHnow 
Legs 
Fig. 5.3. Types  of circulation 
Arteries 
Cardiovascular  System  105 
Types  of Arteries  and  Structure 
1. Large  arteries  of elastic  type,  e.g.  aorta  and  its main  branches 
(brachiocephalic,  common  carotid,  subclavian  and common  iliac) 
and the pulmonary  arteries. 
2. Medium  and  small  arteries  of muscular  type,  e.g.  temporal, 
occipital,  radial,  popliteal,  etc. 
3. Smallest  arteries  of muscular  type  are called  arterioles.  They 
measure  50-100  micron  in diameter.  Arterioles  divide  into 
terminal  arterioles  with  a diameter  of 15-20  micron,  and having 
one or two  layers  of smooth  muscle  in their  walls.  The  side 
branches  from  terminal  arterioles  are called  metarterioles  which 
measure  10-15  micron  at their  origin  and about  5 micron  at their 
termination  (Fig.  5.4). 
The terminal  narrow  end  of metarteriole  is surrounded  by a 
precapillary  sphincter  which  regulates  blood  flow  into  the 
capillary  bed. 
Fig. 5.4:  Capillary  bed  between  arteriole  and  venule Arteriole 
Metarterioles 
I Capillaries 
Shunt 
^Venule Precapillary  -
sphincter 
106 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
It is important  to know  that the muscular  arterioles  are responsible 
for generating  peripheral  resistance,  and thereby  for regulating 
the diastolic  blood  pressure. 
Microscopically,  all arteries  are made  up of three  coats. 
(a) The  inner  coat  is called  tunica  intima  (Fig.  5.5). 
(b) The  middle  coat  is called  tunica  media. 
(c) The  outer  coat  is called  tunica  adventitia.  It is strongest  of all 
coats  and merges  with  the perivascular  sheath. 
The relative  thickness  of the coats  and  the relative  proportion  of 
the muscular,  elastic  and  fibrous  tissues  vary  in different  types  of 
arteries. 
Blood  Supply  of Arteries 
The large  arteries  (of more  than  1 mm diameter)  are supplied  with 
blood  vessels. 
The nutrient  vessels,  called  vasa  vasorum,  form  a dense  capillary 
network  in the tunica  adventitia,  and  supply  the adventitia  and  the 
outer  part  of tunica  media. 
The rest of the vessel  wall  (intima  + inner  part of media)  is nourished 
directly  by diffusion  from  the luminal  blood. 
Minute  veins  accompanying  the arteries  drain  the blood  from  the 
outer  part  of arterial  wall. 
Lymphatics  are also  present  in the adventitia. Fig. 5.5:  Microscopic  structure  of (a) artery,  (b) vein,  and  (c) lymph  vessel Tunica-
adventitia 
Tunica 
media 
Tunica 
intima Vein 
Lymph  vessel 
with valve 
Cardiovascular  System  I 107 
Palpable  Arteries 
Some  arteries  can be palpated  through  the skin.  These  are:  common 
carotid,  facial,  brachial,  radial,  abdominal  aorta,  femoral,  posterior  tibial 
and dorsalis  pedis  (Fig.  5.6). 
Nerve  Supply  of Arteries 
The nerves  supplying  an artery  are called  nervi  vascularis. 
The nerves  are mostly  non-myelinated  sympathetic  fibres  which  are 
vasoconstrictor  in function.  A few  fibres  are myelinated,  and  are 
believed  to be sensory  to the outer  and inner  coats  of the arteries. 
Vasodilator  innervation  is restricted  to the following  sites. 
(a) The  skeletal  muscle  vessels  are  dilated  by cholinergic 
sympathetic  nerves. 
(b) The  exocrine  gland  vessels  are dilated  on parasympathetic 
stimulation. 
(c) The  cutaneous  vessels  are dilated  locally  to produce  the flare 
(redness)  after  an injury.  The vasodilatation  is produced  by the 
afferent  impulses  in the  cutaneous  nerves  which  pass 
antidromically  in their  collaterals  to the blood  vessels  (axon 
reflex). 
VEINS 
Characteristic  Features 
1. Veins  are thin-walled,  being  thinner  than  the arteries. 
2. Their  lumen  is larger  than  that  of the accompanying  arteries. 
3. Veins  have  valves  which  maintain  the unidirectional  flow  of 
blood,  even  against  gravity. 
Since  the venous  pressure  is low  (7 mm  Hg),  the valves  are of 
utmost  value  in the venous  return.  However,  the valves  are absent: 
(a) In the veins  of less than  2 mm diameter. 
(b) In the venae  cavae. 
(c) In the hepatic,  renal,  uterine,  ovarian  (not  testicular),  cerebral, 
spinal,  pulmonary,  and umbilical  veins. 
4. The  muscular  and  elastic  tissue  content  of the venous  walls  is 
much  less  than  that  of the arteries.  This  is directly  related  to the 
low venous  pressure. 
108 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Fig. 5.6:  Palpable  arteries Femoral 
— Popliteal 
Posterior  tibial 
Dorsalis  pedis Abdomina 
aorta Brachial 
Radial  — Common  carotid 
Cardiovascular  System  I 109 
5. Large  veins  have  dead  space  around  them  for their  dilatation 
during  increased  venous  return.  The  dead  space  commonly 
contains  the regional  lymph  nodes  (Fig.  5.7). 
Structure  of Veins 
Veins  are made  up of usual  three  coats  which  are found  in the arteries. 
But the coats  are ill-defined,  and the muscle  and elastic  tissue  content 
is poor. 
In poorly  developed  tunica  media,  the amount  of collagen  fibres  is 
more  than  the elastic  and muscle  fibres.  The adventitia  is thickest  and 
best developed.  The  smooth  muscle  is altogether  absent: 
(a) in the veins  of maternal  part  of placenta; 
(b) in the cranial  venous  sinuses  and pial veins; 
(c) in the retinal  veins; 
(d) in the veins  of cancellous  bone;  and 
(e) in the venous  spaces  of the corpora  cavernosa  and  corpus 
spongiosum. Femoral  canal 
with lymph  node 
(dead  space) 
Fig. 5.7:  Dead  space  with  large  veins Femoral  vein Femoral  artery 
110 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Table  5.1 Shows  the comparison  of arteries  and veins. 
Table  5.1.  Comparison  of arteries  and  veins 
Arteries Veins 
1. Arteries  carry  oxygenated  blood, Veins  carry  deoxygenated 
away  from  the heart  except blood,  towards  the heart  except 
pulmonary  artery pulmonary  veins 
2. These  are mostly  deeply  situated These  are superficial  and  deep  in 
in the body location 
3. These  are thick-walled,  highly These  are thin-walled 
muscular  except  arteries  of 
cranium  and  vertebral  column 
4. These  posses  narrow  lumen These  posses  wide  lumen 
5. Valves  are absent Valves  are present  which  provide 
unidirectional  flow  of blood 
6. These  are reddish  in colour These  are bluish  in colour 
7. These  show  spurty  movement  of These  show  sluggish  movement 
blood  giving  pulse of blood 
8. Blood  in arteries  moves  with Blood  in veins  moves  under  very 
pressure low pressure 
9. Arteries  empty  up at the time  of Veins  get filled  up at time  of death 
death 
10. If arterial  wall  is injured,  the blood If venous  wall  is injured,  blood 
comes  out like a 'fountain'  in a comes  out,  collects  in a pool  in a 
large  area  all around  the artery small  area  around  vein 
Blood  and  Nerve  Supply  of Veins 
The larger  veins,  like  the arteries,  are supplied  with  nutrient  vessels 
called  vasa  vasorum.  But  in the veins,  the vessels  may  penetrate  up to 
the intima,  probably  because  of the low  venous  pressure  and the low 
oxygen  tension. 
Nerves  also  are distributed  to the veins  in the same  manner  as to the 
arteries,  but are fewer  in number. 
Factors  Helping  in Venous  Return 
1. Overflow  from  the capillaries,  pushed  from  behind  by the arteries 
(vis-a-tergo). 
Cardiovascular  System  I 111 
2. Negative  intrathoracic  pressure  sucks  the blood  into  the heart 
from  all over  the body. 
3. Gravity  helps  venous  return  in the upper  part  of the body. 
4. Arterial  pulsations  press  on the venae  comitantes  intermittently 
and drive  the venous  blood  towards  the heart. 
5. Venous  valves  prevent  any regurgitation  (back  flow)  of the luminal 
blood  (Fig.  5.8). 
Muscle  pump  and 
closed  venous 
valve 
Fig. 5.8:  Venous  valves  and  muscle  pump  in lower  limb Open  venous  valve 
112 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
6. Muscular  contractions  press  on the veins  and form  a very  effective 
mechanism  of venous  return.  This  becomes  still  more  effective, 
within  the tight  sleeve  of the deep  fascia,  as is seen  in the lower 
limbs.  The calf muscles  (soleus)  for this reason  are known  as the 
peripheral  heart.  Thus  the muscle  pumps  are  important  factors 
in the venous  return. 
CAPILLARIES 
Capillaries  (capillus  = hair)  are networks  of microscopic  endothelial 
tubes  interposed  between  the metarterioles  and venules  (Fig.  5.4).  The 
true capillaries  (without  any smooth  muscle  cell)  begin  after  a transition 
zone  of 50-100  micron  beyond  the precapillary  sphincters. 
The capillaries  are replaced  by cavernous  (dilated)  spaces  in the 
sex organs,  splenic  pulp  and placenta. 
Size 
The average  diameter  of a capillary  is 6-8 micron,  just  sufficient  to 
permit  the red blood  cells  to pass  through  in 'single  file'.  But  the size 
varies  from  organ  to organ.  It is smallest  in the brain  and intestines, 
and is largest  (20 micron)  in the skin  and bone  marrow. 
Types  and  Structure 
The capillaries  are classified  as continuous  and fenestrated  according 
to the type  of junctions  between  the endothelial  cells. 
1. Continuous  capillaries  are found  in the skin,  connective  tissue, 
skeletal  and smooth  muscles,  lung  and brain.  These  allow  passage 
across  their  walls  of small  molecules  (up to 10 micron  size). 
2. Fenestrated  capillaries  are found  in the renal  glomeruli/intestinal 
mucosa,  endocrine  glands  and  pancreas.  These  allow  passage 
across  their  walls  of larger  molecules  (up to 20-100  micron  size). 
The capillary  bed and postcapillary  venules  form  an enormous  area 
for the exchange  of nutrients,  gases,  metabolites  and  water,  between 
the blood  and  interstitial  fluid.  Capillaries  also  allow  migration  of 
leucocytes  out of the vessels. 
SINUSOIDS 
Sinusoids,  replace  capillaries  in certain  organs,  like liver,  spleen,  bone 
marrow,  suprarenal  glands,  parathyroid  glands,  carotid  body,  etc. 
Cardiovascular  System  I 113 
Characteristics 
Sinusoids  are large,  irregular,  vascular  spaces  which  are closely 
surrounded  by the parenchyma  of the organ.  These  differ  from 
capillaries  in the following  respects; 
1. Their  lumen  is wider  (upto  30 micron)  and irregular. 
2. Their  walls  are thinner  and  may  be incomplete.  They  are lined 
by endothelium  in which  the phagocytic  cells  (macrophages)  are 
often  distributed.  The  adventitial  support  is absent. 
3. These  may  connect  arteriole  with  venule  (spleen,  bone  marrow), 
or venule  with  venule  (liver). 
ANASTOMOSES 
Definition 
A precapillary  or postcapillary  communication  between  the 
neighbouring  vessels  is called  anastomoses.  Circulation  through  the 
anastomosis  is called  collateral  circulation. 
Types 
A. Arterial  anastomoses  is the communication  between  the arteries, 
or branches  of arteries.  It may  be actual  or potential. 
1. In actual  arterial  anastomosis  the arteries  meet  end to end. 
For example,  palmar  arches  (Fig.  5.9),  plantar  arch,  circle  of 
Willis,  intestinal  arcades,  labial  branches  of facial  arteries. 
2. In potential  arterial  anastomoses  the  communication  takes 
place  between  the terminal  arterioles.  Such  communications 
can dilate  only  gradually  for collateral  circulation.  Therefore 
on sudden  occlusion  of a main  artery,  the anastomoses  may 
fail to compensate  the loss.  The  examples  are seen  in the 
coronary  arteries  (Fig.  5.10)  and  the cortical  branches  of 
cerebral  arteries,  etc. 
B. Venous  anastomoses  is the communication  between  the veins 
or tributaries  of veins.  For example,  the dorsal  venous  arches  of 
the hand  and foot. 
C. Arteriovenous  anastomosis  (shunt)  is the communication 
between  an artery  and  a vein.  It serves  the function  of phasic 
activity  of the organ.  When  the organ  is active  these  shunts  are 
closed  and the blood  circulates  through  the capillaries. 
114 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Fig. 5.10:  Potential  arterial  anastomosis  between  coronary  arteries Superficial  and 
Deep  palmar  arches 
Radial  artery Ulnar  artery 
Fig. 5.9:  Actual  arterial  anastomosis  forming  palmar  arch 
- Left  coronary  artery 
Right 
coronary  artery 
Cardiovascular  System  I 115 
However,  when  the organ  is at rest,  the blood  bypasses  the capillary 
bed and is shunted  back  through  the arteriovenous  anastomosis. 
The shunt  vessel  may  be straight  or coiled,  possesses  a thick 
muscular  coat,  and is under  the influence  of sympathetic  system 
(Fig.  5.11). 
Fig. 5.11:  Arteriovenous  shunt  bypassing  the capillaries 
Shunts  of simple  structure  are found  in the skin  of nose,  lips and 
external  ear;  in the mucous  membrane  of nose  and  alimentary 
canal;  the coccygeal  body;  the erectile  tissue  of sexual  organs; 
the tongue;  the thyroid  gland  and sympathetic  ganglia. 
Specialized  arteriovenous  anastomoses  are found  in the skin  of 
digital  pads  and  nail  beds.  They  form  a number  of small  units 
called  glomera. 
Preferential  'thoroughfare  channels  'are  also  a kind  of shunts.  They 
course  through  the capillary  network.  Many  true  capillaries  arise  as 
their side  branches. Arteriole 
- AV shunt 
Venule 
116 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
One thoroughfare  channel  with  its associated  capillaries  forms  a 
microcirculatory  unit.  The  size  of the unit  is variable  from  1-2  to 
20-30  true  capillaries.  The  number  of active  units  varies  from  time  to 
time. 
END-ARTERIES 
Definition 
Arteries  which  do not anastomose  with  their  neighbours  are called  end 
arteries  (Fig.  5.12). 
Examples: 
1. Central  artery  of retina  and labyrinthine  artery  of internal  ear are 
the best  examples  of an absolute  end arteries. 
2. Central  branches  of cerebral  arteries  and vasa  recta  of mesenteric 
arteries. 
3. Arteries  of spleen,  kidney,  lungs  and metaphyses  of long  bones. 
Fig. 5.12:  End  artery  of the retina Central  artery  of retina 
Ophthalmic  artery 
Internal  carotid  artery 
i Cardiovascular  System  I 117 
Importance 
Occlusion  of an end-artery  causes  serious  nutritional  disturbances 
resulting  in death  of the tissue  supplied  by it. For example,  occlusion 
of central  artery  of retina  results  in blindness. 
• The blood  pressure  is the arterial  pressure  exerted  by the blood  on 
the arterial  walls.  The maximum  pressure  during  ventricular  systole 
is called  systolic  pressure;  the minimum  pressure  during  ventricular 
diastole  is called  diastolic  pressure.  The  systolic  pressure  is 
generated  by the force  of contraction  of the heart;  the diastolic 
pressure  is chiefly  due to arteriolar  tone  (peripheral  resistance).  The 
heart  has to pump  the blood  against  the diastolic  pressure  which  is 
a direct  load  on the heart.  Normally,  the blood  pressure  is roughly 
120/80  mm  Hg,  the systolic  pressure  ranging  from  110-130,  and 
the diastolic  pressure  from  70-80.  The  difference  between  systolic 
and diastolic  pressure  is called  'pulsepressure'. 
• Haemorrhage  (bleeding)  is the obvious  result  of rupture  of the blood 
vessels.  Venous  haemorrhage  causes  oozing  of blood;  arterial 
haemorrhage  causes  spurting  of blood  (Fig.  5.13). 
Fig. 5.13:  (a) Spurting  of blood  in arterial  haemorrhage,  (b) Pooling  of 
blood  in venous  haemorrhage APPLIED  ANATOMY  OF CVS 
VMP 
(a) (b) 
• Vascular  catastrophies  are of three  types: 
(a) Thrombosis 
(b) Embolism 
118 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(c) Haemorrhage.  All of them  result  in a loss of blood  supply  to the 
area of distribution  of the vessel  involved,  unless  it is 
compensated  by collateral  circulation. 
•Arteriosclerosis:  In old  age  the arteries  become  stiff.  This 
phenomenon  it called  arteriosclerosis.  This  causes  a variable 
reduction  in the blood  supply  to the tissues  and  a rise  in systolic 
pressure. 
• Arteritis  and  Phlebitis:  Inflammation  of an artery  is known  as 
arteritis,  and inflammation  of a vein  as phlebitis. 
• Atheroma  are patchy  changes  developed  in the tunica  intima  of 
arteries  due  to accumulation  of cholesterol  and  other  lipid 
compounds.  Arteries  most  commonly  narrowed  are those  in the heart, 
brain,  small  intestine,  kidneys  and  lower  limbs.  The  changes  are 
called  thrombi  (Fig.  5.14). 
• Coronary  arteries  blockage:  These  may  be opened  up by stents 
(Fig.  5.15).  Blocked  coronary  artery  may  be replaced  by a graft 
(Fig.  5.16). 
• Aneurysm  is the swelling  or dilation  of blood  vessels  where  part of 
the wall  of artery  inflates  like a balloon.  The wall  of the blood  vessel 
at the site of aneurysm  is weaker  and  thinner  than  the rest  of the 
blood  vessels.  Due  to its likelihood  to burst  it poses  a serious  risk to 
health  (Fig.  5.17). Fig. 5.14:  Thrombi  formation  due  to atheroma 
r Cardiovascular  System  I 119 
Fig. 5.15:  Stent  inside  the coronary  artery 
Graft  between 
ascending  aorta  and 
right coronary  artery 
Fig. 5.16:  Graft  for bypassing  the  blocked  coronary  artery 
1 Buerger's  disease  (thromboangitis  obliterans):  This  is a very  painful 
condition.  There  is inflammation  of small  peripheral  arteries  of the 
legs.  The victim  is a young  person  and a heavy  smoker. 
Raynaud's  phenomenon:  In this condition  there  is spasmodic  attack 
of pallor  of the fingers  due  to constriction  of small  arteries  and 
arterioles  in response  to cold. 
120 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Aneurysms 
Fig.  5.17:  Aneurysms  in circle  of Willis 
•Acute  phlebothrombosis:  The  veins 
of the lower  limbs  are affected.  Due  to 
lack of movement  of the legs  there  is 
thrombus  formation  with  mild 
inflammation.  This  thrombus  may  get 
dislodged  and  flow  in the blood  and 
may block  any  other  artery.  This 
condition  is called  as embolism. 
•Varicose  veins:  When  the vein  wall 
is subjected  to increased  pressure  over 
long time  there  is atrophy  of muscle 
and elastic  tissue  with  fibrous 
replacement.  This  leads  to stretching 
of the  vein  with  tortuosity  and 
localized  bulging.  Venous  congestion 
of the feet  is relieved  by putting  feet 
on the stool,  that  is higher  than  the 
trunk,  helping  in venous  return  and 
relief  in tiredness  (Fig.  5.18).  Varicose 
veins  may  occur  at the lower  end  of Fig.  5.18:  Varicose  veins  in 
oesophagus  or in the anal  canal.  lower  limb 
Cardiovascular  System  I 121 
• At times  parenteral  nutrition  can be given  through  the right  subclavian 
vein (Fig.  5.19). 
• Blood  vessels  can be examined  in the retina  by ophthalmoscope, 
especially  in cases  of diabetes  and hypertension. 
Fig. 5.19:  Parenteral  nutrition  through  right  subclavian  vein 
6 
Lymphatic  System 
Lymphatic  system  is essentially  a drainage  system  which  is accessory 
to the venous  system  (Fig.  6.1). 
Most  of the tissue  fluid  formed  at the arterial  end  of capillaries  is 
absorbed  back  into  the blood  by the venous  ends  of the capillaries  and 
the postcapillary  venules.  The  rest  of the tissue  fluid  (10-20%)  is 
absorbed  by the lymphatics  which  begin  blindly  in the tissue  spaces. 
Fig. 6.1:  Lymphatic  system 
It is important  to know  that the larger  particles  (proteins  and particulate 
matter)  can be removed  from  the tissue  fluid  only  by the lymphatics. 
Therefore,  the lymphatic  system  may  be regarded  as 'drainage  system 
of coarse  type'  and  the venous  system  as 'drainage  system  of fine 
type'. Lymphatic  duct 
Veins  -
Lymph  capillaries Arteries 
- Capillaries 
124 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Certain  parts  of the lymphatic  system  (lympho-reticular  organs), 
however,  are chiefly  involved  in phagocytosis,  raising  immune  responses, 
and contributing  to cell populations  of the blood  and lymph. 
The tissue  fluid  flowing  in the lymphatics  is called  lymph.  It passes 
through  filters  (lymph  nodes)  placed  in the course  of lymphatics,  and 
finally  drains  into the venous  blood. 
Lymph  from  most  of the tissues  is clear  and colourless,  but the lymph 
from  small  intestine  is milky-white  due to absorption  of fat. The intestinal 
milky  lymph  is called  chyle,  and lymph  vessels,  the lacteals. 
Components  of Lymphatic  System 
The lymphatic  system  comprises:  (1) lymph  vessels;  (2) central  lymphoid 
tissues;  (3) peripheral  lymphoid  organs;  and (4) circulating  lymphocytes. 
1. Lymph  Vessels 
The lymph  capillaries  begin  blindly  in the tissue  spaces  (Fig.  6.2)  and 
form  intricate  networks.  Their  calibre  is greater  and less  regular  than 
that of blood  capillaries,  and  their  endothelial  wall  is permeable  to 
substances  of much  greater  molecular  size  (Fig.  5.5). 
Lymph  capillaries  are absent  from  the cellular  structures  like brain, 
spinal  cord,  splenic  pulp,  and bone  marrow. 
Lymph  capillaries  have  been  compared  to blood  capillaries  in 
Table  6.1. 
Table  6.1.  Comparison  of lymph  and  blood  capillaries 
Lymph  capillaries Blood  capillaries 
1. Colourless,  difficult  to observe. Reddish,  easy  to observe. 
2. Blind  (closed  at the  tip). Joined  to arterioles  at one  end  and 
to venules  at another  end. 
3. Wider  than  blood  capillaries. Narrower  than  lymph  capillaries 
4. Wall  consist  of thin  endothelium Wall  consist  of normal  endothelium 
and poorly  developed  basement and basement  membrane. 
membrane. 
5. Contain  colourless  lymph. Contain  red  blood. 
6. Have  relatively  low  pressure. Have  relatively  high  pressure. 
7. Absorb  tissue  fluid  from  inter- Add  tissue  fluid  to intercellular 
cellular  spaces. spaces. 
Lymphatic  System  I 125 
Fig. 6.2:  Relation  of lymphatic  and  circulatory  system 
The lymph  capillaries  join to form  lymphatics,  which  are superficial 
and deep  lymphatics.  The superficial  lymphatics  accompany  veins,  while 
the deep  lymphatics  accompany  arteries. 
The lymph  passes  through  filters  or barriers  of the regional  lymph 
nodes  which  trap  the particulate  matter. 
The filtered  lymph  passes  through  larger  lymphatics  and is eventually 
collected  into  two large  trunks,  the thoracic  duct  and  right  lymphatic 
duct,  which  pour  their  lymph  into  the brachiocephalic  veins  (Fig.  6.3). 
Thoracic  duct  drains  both  lower  limbs,  abdomen,  left halves  of thorax, 
head  and neck  and left upper  limb.  Right  lymphatic  duct  drains  right 
halves  of thorax,  head  and neck  and right  upper  limb. 
The lymphatics  anastomose  freely  with  their  neighbours  of the same 
side as well  as of the opposite  side.  Larger  lymphatics  are supplied 
with their  vasa  vasorum  and  are accompanied  by a plexus  of fine 
blood  vessels  which  form  red streaks  seen  in lymphangitis. 
2. Central  Lymphoid  Tissues 
Central  lymphoid  tissues  comprise  bone  marrow  and thymus. 
All 'pluripotent'  lymphoid  stem  cells  are initially  produced  by bone 
marrow,  except  during  early  fetal  life when  these  are produced  by liver iThoracic  duct Aorta 
Cells  of liver Inferior  vena  cava 
126 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
and spleen.  The stem  cells  undergo  differentiation  in the central  lymphoid 
tissues,  so that the lymphocytes  become  competent  defensive  elements 
of the immune  system. 
Bone  marrow  helps  differentiation  of the  (committed 
B-lymphocytes  which  are capable  of synthesizing  antibodies  after  getting 
transformed  into  plasma  cells. 
In birds,  B-cells  are differentiated  in the wall  of the bursa  of Fabricius 
a hindgut  diverticulum. 
Area  drained  by 
thoracic  duct Area  drained  , 
by right  f 
lymphatic  duct 
1. Left  jugular  lymph  trunk.  2. Left  subclavian 
lymph  trunk.  3. Left  broncho-mediastinal  lymph 
trunk.  4. Thoracic  duct.  5. Descending  thoracic 
lymph  trunk.  6. Intestinal  lymph  trunk.  7. Left 
lumbar  lymph  trunk.  8. External  iliac  lymph  trunk. 
9. Internal  iliac lymph  trunk.  10. Cisterna  chyli.  11. 
Intercostal  lymph  vessels.  12.  Right 
bronchomediastinal  lymph  trunk.  13.  Superior 
vena  cava.  14. Right  lymphatic  duct. 
Fig. 6.3:  Area  drained  by thoracic  duct  and  right  lymphatic  duct 
Lymphatic  System  I 127 
Thymus  helps  differentiation  of immunologically  competent  but 
uncommitted  T-lymphocytes  (10%  of thymic  population)  which  are long-
lived,  join the circulating  pool  of lymphocytes,  and populate  the thymus-
dependent  areas  of lymph  nodes  and other  peripheral  lymphoid  organs. 
T-cells  being  uncommitted  can  react  to a wide  range  of foreign 
antigenic  stimuli. 
These  respond  by cytotoxic  cell killing  (killing  virus-infected  cells, 
neoplastic  cells,  fungi,  tissue  grafts,  etc.),  by 'arming'  macrophages, 
and by triggering  the large  mononuclear  cells  (killer  cells)  and the 'helper' 
activity  of B-lymphocytes. 
3. Peripheral  Lymphoid  Organs 
Peripheral  lymphoid  organs  comprise  lymph  nodes,  spleen,  and 
epithelio-lymphoid  tissues  (lymphoid  nodules  developed  in the alimentary 
and respiratory  tracts).  Any  part  of this  may  become  overactive  on 
appropriate  stimulation. 
The progenies  of B- and T-lymphocytes  reach  these  organs  where 
the cells  may  proliferate  and mature  into  competent  cells.  The  mature 
lymphocytes  join the circulating  pool  of lymphocytes. 
4. Circulating  Pool  of Lymphocytes 
The pool  contains  mature  progenies  of B- and T-lymphocytes  which 
may be called  upon  during  antigenic  emergencies  (Roitt,  1977). 
Lymphatic  Follicle  (Nodule) 
Collections  of lymphocytes  occur  at many  places  in the body. 
Everywhere  there  is a basic  pattern,  the lymphatic  follicle.  The  follicle 
is a spherical  collection  of lymphocytes  with  a pale  centre  known  as 
germinal  centre,  where  the lymphocytes  are more  loosely  packed. 
The central  cells  are larger  in size,  stain  less deeply,  and divide  more 
rapidly,  than  the peripheral  cells. 
LYMPH  NODES 
Lymph  nodes  are small  nodules  of lymphoid  tissue  found  in the course 
°f smaller  lymphatics. 
The lymph  passes  through  one or more  lymph  nodes  before  reaching 
the larger  lymph  trunks. 
128 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
The nodes  are oval  or reniform  in shape,  1-25  mm long,  and light 
brown,  black  (pulmonary),  or creamy  white  (intestinal)  in colour. 
Usually  they  occur  in groups  (cervical,  axillary,  inguinal,  mesenteric, 
mediastinal,  etc.),  but at times  there  may  be a solitary  lymph  node. 
Superficial  nodes  are arranged  along  the veins,  and the deep  nodes 
along  the arteries. 
Cervical  lymph  nodes  form  a ring  at the junction  of head  and neck 
and vertical  chains  in the neck  (Fig.  6.4).  These  drain  whole  of head 
and neck.  On right  side  lymph  vessels  drain  into  right  lymphatic  duct, 
while  on left side  these  drain  into  thoracic  duct.  Lymph  vessels  of 
abdominal  wall  above  a line passing  horizontally  through  umbilicus  drain 
into respective  sides  of axillary  lymph  nodes.  Lymph  vessels  below  this 
line drain  into  inguinal  group  of lymph  nodes.  This  line  is called 
"watershed"  (Fig.  6.5). 
Preauricular 
Mandibular 
Buccal 
Submental 
Deep  cervical Occipital 
Postauricular 
Superficial  cervical 
Submandibular 
Anterior  cervical 
Fig. 6.4:  Lymph  nodes  in the neck 
Each  lymph  node  has a slight  depression  on one side,  called  hilum. 
The artery  enters  the node,  and the vein  with  efferent  lymphatic  comes 
out of it, at the hilum. 
The afferent  lymphatics  enter  the node  at different  parts  of its 
periphery. 
Structurally,  a lymph  node  is made  up of the following  parts 
(Fig.  6.6). 
1. Fibrous  and  reticular  framework:  The  lymph  node  is covered 
by a capsule.  From  the deep  surface  of the capsule  a number  of 
Lymphatic  System  I 129 
trabeculae  extend  radially  into  the interior  of the node,  where 
they are continuous  with  the fine  reticulum  which  forms  the 
supporting  framework  for the lymphoid  tissue. 
Germinal  center Cortex 
Paracortical  area 
(T cells) Efferent 
lymphatic 
vessel Afferent 
lymphatic 
vessel Medulla 
Fig. 6.6.  Structure  of lymph  node  (diagrammatic) Inguinal  lymph  node Axillary 
lymph 
nodes\/ 
Fig. 6.5:  Lymph  vessels  of anterior  and  posterior  abdominal  wall 
Artery 
Vein Watershed 
130 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
2. Lymphatic  channels:  The  subcapsular  sinus  lies  beneath  the 
capsule  and surrounds  the node  except  at the hilum.  Many  afferent 
lymphatics  of the node  open  into  the subcapsular  sinus.  Lymph 
filters  through  reticulin  fibres  and leaves  the node  by one efferent 
lymphatic  vessel. 
3. Cortex:  It is the outer  part  of the lymph  node  situated  beneath 
the subcapsular  sinus,  being  absent  at the hilum. 
It is made  up of lymphatic  follicles  and is traversed  by fibrous 
trabeculae. 
The cortex  is far more  densely  cellular  than  the medulla. 
It is divided  into: 
(a) Zone  1, containing  loosely  packed  small  lymphocytes, 
macrophages  and occasional  plasma  cells  in the periphery  of 
the follicle  and extending  into the medullary  cords. 
(b) Zone  2, containing  more  densely  packed  small  lymphocytes 
and macrophages,  deep  to zone  I and limited  to cortical  and 
paracortical  (inner  cortex)  areas. 
(c) Zone  3, including  the germinal  centre  which  contains  large 
lymphocytes  and macrophages. 
The maturing  lymphocytes  pass  from  zone  3 to zone  2 to 
zone  1 and to the lymph  sinus  (Fig.  6.7). 
According  to the distribution  of B- and T-lymphocytes,  the cortex 
is divided  into: 
1. An  outer  part  which  contains  immature  B-lymphocytes. 
2. An  inner  part,  between  the germinal  centre  and the medulla, 
which  contains  T-lymphocytes.  This  part  is known  as 
paracortex  or thymus  dependent  zone. 
The mature  B-lymphocytes  (plasma  cells)  are found  in the medulla. 
4. Medulla:  It is the central  part of the lymph  node,  containing  loosely 
packed  lymphocytes  (forming  irregular  branching  medullary 
cords),  the plasma  cells,  and macrophages. 
5. Blood  channels:  The  artery  enters  at the hilum  and divides  into 
straight  branches  which  run in the trabeculae.  In the cortex  the 
arteries  further  divide  to form  arcades  of arterioles  and capillaries 
with many  anastomosing  loops. 
The capillaries  give  rise to venules  and veins,  which  run back  to 
the hilum.  The  capillaries  are more  profuse  around  the follicles, 
Lymphatic  System  I 131 
and the postcapillary  venules  are more  abundant  in the paracortical 
zones  for lymphatic  migration. 
Zone  of T-lymphocytes  (paracortex) 
Zone  of mature 
Zone  of immature  B-lymphocytes  (cortex) AL B-lymphocytes  (medulla) 
AL 
Cortical  lymph  sinus 
Reticulum  (framework  of follicle 
Subcapsular  lymph  sinus Vascular  loops 
Trabecula 
Lymphatic  follicle  (cortex) 
Medulla  lymph  sinus 
Zones  of lymphatic  follicle 
Fig. 6.7.  Zones  in lymph  node.  AL = afferent  lymphatics; 
EL = efferent  lymphatic 
Haemal  Nodes 
These  are small  lymphatic  bodies  resembling  lymph  nodes  in their 
structure,  which  are found  in the course  of blood  vessels. 
The afferent  and efferent  lymphatics  are absent.  Their  sinuses  are 
filled  with  blood  rather  than  lymph. 
These  are found  in some  animals  in relation  to their  abdominal  and 
thoracic  viscera. 
Haemal  nodes  may  represent  an intermediate  stage  between  a lymph 
node  and the spleen.  In man,  the spleen  is a large  haemal  node. 
Mononuclear  Phagocyte  System  or Macrophage  System 
(Reticulo-endothelial  System) 
This system  is closely  related  to lymphatic  system  because  the two are 
independent  structurally  and functionally.  The macrophage  system  is Capsule 
132 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
made  up of highly  phagocytic  cells  which  are widely  distributed  in the 
body.  These  cells  include: 
(a) Macrophages  of connective  tissue,  reticular  tissue  and lungs 
(b) Monocytes  of blood 
(c) Kupffer's  cells  of liver 
(d) Meningocytes  of meninges 
(e) Microglial  cells  of nervous  tissue 
(f) Foreign  body  giant  cells. 
The endothelial  cells,  fibroblasts,  and most  leucocytes  are not included 
in this system  because  of their  poor  power  of phagocytosis. 
Functions 
1. The  system  forms  first  line of defence  of the body  against  micro-
organisms,  because  of the amoeboid  and  phagocytic  properties 
of its cells. 
2. The  macrophages  of lymphoid  tissue  are now  considered  to be 
intimately  concerned  with  mounting  specific  immune  responses 
by the neighbouring  cells. 
3. Many  of the prominent  sites  of RES  are also  important  sites  of 
haemopoiesis. 
Growth  Pattern  of Lymphoid  Tissue 
Lymphoid  tissue  of the body  is prominent  at birth,  and grows  rapidly 
during  childhood. 
The growth  ceases  at about  the time  of puberty,  and is followed  by 
partial  atrophy  in the later  years. 
This growth  pattern  is shared  by lymph  nodes,  thymus,  tonsils, 
lymphoid  tissue  of the intestines,  and the follicles  of spleen. 
However,  the lymph  nodes  may  enlarge  again  in response  to 
inflammation  (lymphadenitis)  or tumour  formation  (Hodgkin's  disease, 
lymphosarcoma,  etc.). 
Lymph  nodes  are commonly  enlarged  by metastasis  (spread)  of the 
malignant  growths  (carcinoma). 
Functions  of Lymphoid  System 
1. Lymph  capillaries  absorb  and remove  the large  protein  molecules 
and other  particulate  matter  from  the tissue  spaces.  Thus  the 
Lymphatic  System  I 133 
cellular  debris  and foreign  particles  (dust  particles  inhaled  into the 
lungs,  bacteria  and  other  microorganisms)  are conveyed  to the 
regional  lymph  nodes.  Lymphatics  (lacteals)  help  in transportation 
of fat from  the gut. 
2. Lymph  nodes  serve  a number  of functions. 
(a) They  act as filters  for the lymph  which  percolates  slowly 
through  the intricate  network  of its spaces.  Thus  the foreign 
particles  are prevented  from  entering  the bloodstream. 
(b) The  foreign  particles  are engulfed  by the macrophages  in the 
sinuses. 
(c) Antigens  are also  trapped  by the phagocytes. 
(d) The  mature  B-lymphocytes  (plasma  cells  capable  of producing 
antibodies)  and  mature  T-lymphocytes  are produced  in the 
node. 
(e) Both  the cellular  and humoral  immune  responses  are mounted 
against  the antigen-laden  phagocytes. 
(t) The  circulating  lymphocytes  can pass  back  into the lymphatic 
channels  within  the node, 
(g) Humoral  antibodies  are freely  produced  by the lymph  nodes. 
3. Production  (proliferation)  and maturation  ofB-  and T-lymphocytes 
is the main  function  of lymphoid  tissue. 
CLINICAL  ANATOMY 
• Lymphatics  are primarily  meant  for coarse  drainage,  including  cell 
debris  and microorganisms,  from  the tissue  spaces  to the regional 
lymph  nodes,  where  the foreign  and noxious  material  is filtered  off 
by the phagocytic  activity  of the macrophage  cells  for its final  disposal 
by the appropriate  immune  responses  within  the node.  Thus  the 
lymphatic  system  forms  the first  line  of defence  of the body. 
While  draining  from  an infected  area,  the lymphatics  and lymph  nodes 
carrying  infected  debris  may  become  inflammed,  resulting  in 
lymphangitis  (Fig.  6.8)  and  lymphadenitis.  In  acute  cases  the 
lymphatics  are marked  on the skin  as painful  red lines  leading  to the 
painful  and  tender  swollen  lymph  nodes  which  may  suppurate. 
Chronic  infections  (tuberculosis,  syphilis,  etc.)  cause  chronic 
lymphadenitis. 
134 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
•The  filarial  parasite  lives  in the lymphatics,  which  may  become 
blocked,  giving  rise to solid  oedema  (elephantiasis)  in the peripheral 
area of drainage.  Elephantiasis  is characterized  by enormous 
enlargement  of the limb  or scrotum  (Fig.  6.9)  due to the thickened 
skin.  The microfilariae  enter  the blood  stream  only  during  night  and, 
therefore,  the blood  for examination  must  be collected  during  night. 
Fig. 6.9:  Elephantiasis  involving  the scrotum 
• The lymphatics  provide  the most  convenient  route  of spread  of the 
cancer  cells  (Fig.  6.10).  Therefore,  the lymphatic  drainage  of those 
organs  which  are commonly  involved  in cancer  should  be studied  in 
greater  details  and with  special  interest  for many  reasons: 
(a) It is helpful  in the diagnosis  of the primary  site of the cancer. 
Lymphatic  System  I 135 HHHHII 
(b) It helps  in predicting  the prognosis  and in classifying  the stage  of 
cancer. 
(c) It helps  the surgeon  in doing  the block  dissections  during  operative 
removal  of the cancer. 
The spread  of cancer  causes  enlargement  of the regional  lymph 
nodes,  which  become  fixed  and stony  hard.  Many  a time  the primary 
site of cancer  is quite  insignificant  or even  difficult  to define,  and the 
enormous  enlargement  of the draining  lymph  nodes  due to secondary 
malignant  deposits  forms  the most  prominent  part  of the disease.  A 
retrograde  spread  of cancer  cells,  after  the blockage  of lymphatics, 
may occur  by a reversed  flow  of the lymph. 
• Splenomegaly  is the enlargement  of spleen  mainly  due to infections, 
circulatory  disorders,  blood  diseases  and  malignant  neoplasms.  It 
causes  excessive  and  premature  haemolysis  of red cells  or 
phagocytosis  of normal  white  cells  and platelets  leading  to anaemia, 
leukopenia  and  thrombocytopenia.  Spleen  also  may  enlarge  due 
to congestion  of blood  in portal  venous  congestion,  in right-sided 
heart  failure  and  in fibrosis  caused  due  to cirrhosis  of liver. 
Splenomegaly  also  occurs  to meet  the extra  workload  for removing 
damaged  and  abnormal  blood  cells.  Commonest  cause  of 
splenomegaly  is malaria. 
•Enlargement  of thymus  may  cause  myasthenia  gravis,  which 
produces  extreme  weakness  of the skeletal  muscles.  It may  be treated 
by removal  of enlarged  thymus,  or by drug  treatment. Lymphatics 
Fig. 6.10:  Spread  of cancer  cells  via the lymphatics Cancerous  cells-
7 
Nervous  System 
Nervous  system  is the chief  controlling  and coordinating  system  of the 
body.  It controls  and regulates  all activities  of the body,  whether  voluntary 
or involuntary,  and  adjusts  the individual  (organism)  to the given 
surroundings. 
This is based  on the special  properties  of sensitivity,  conductivity 
and responsiveness  of the nervous  system. 
The protoplasmic  extensions  of the nerve  cells  form  the neural 
pathways  called  nerves.  The  nerves  resemble  the electricity  wires. 
Like the electric  current  flowing  through  the wires,  the impulses  (sensory 
and motor)  are conducted  through  the nerves. 
The sensory  impulses  are transmitted  by the sensory  (afferent)  nerves 
from  the periphery  (skin,  mucous  membranes,  muscles,  tendons,  joints, 
and special  sense  organs)  to the central  nervous  system  (CNS). 
The motor  impulses  are transmitted  by the motor  (efferent)  nerves 
from  the central  nervous  system  to the periphery  (muscles  and glands) 
(Fig.  7.1). 
Thus  the CNS  is kept  continuously  informed  about  the surroundings 
(environment)  through  various  sensory  impulses,  both  general  and 
special. 
The CNS  in turn  brings  about  necessary  adjustment  of the body  by 
issuing  appropriate  orders  which  are passed  on as motor  impulses 
to the muscles,  vessels,  viscera  and  glands.  The  adjustment  of the 
organism  to the given  surroundings  is the most  important  function  of 
the nervous  system,  without  which  it will not be possible  for the organism 
to survive. 
Parts  of Nervous  System 
The nervous  system  is broadly  divided  into  central  and peripheral  parts 
138 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
which  are continuous  with  each  other.  Further  subdivisions  of each 
part are given  below. 
A. Central  nervous  system  (CNS)  includes: 
1. Brain  or encephalon,  which  occupies  cranial  cavity,  and 
contains  the higher  governing  centres  (Fig.  7.2). 
2. Spinal  cord  or spinal  medulla,  which  occupies  upper  two-
thirds  of the vertebral  canal,  and contains  many  reflex  centres. 
Dorsal  root 
fibre Dorsal  root 
ganglion 
Peripheral 
process 
Skeletal 
muscle Lateral  horn 
Ventral  root Anterior 
Motor  neuron  horn 
Fig. 7.1:  Afferent  and  efferent  pathways  through  the spinal  cord 
Fig. 7.2:  Brain  and  spinal  cord Central  sulcus 
Lateral  sulcus - Cerebral 
hemisphere 
Pons 
Medulla  oblongata Cerebellum 
- Spinal  cord Central  i 
process  j Posterior 
horn 
\ 
Motor  fibre 
Nervous  System  I 139 
B. Peripheral  nervous  system  (PNS)  is subdivided  into  the 
following  two components. 
1. Cerebrospinal  nervous  system  is the somatic  component  of 
the peripheral  nervous  system,  which  includes  12 pairs  of cranial 
nerves  (Fig.  7.3)  and 31 pairs  of spinal  nerves.  It innervates 
the somatic  structures  of the head  and neck,  limbs  and body 
wall,  and mediates  somatic  sensory  and motor  functions. 
2. Peripheral  autonomic  nervous  system  is the visceral 
component  of the peripheral  nervous  system,  which  includes 
the visceral  or splanchnic  nerves  that  are connected  to the 
CNS  through  the somatic  nerves.  It innervates  the viscera, 
glands,  blood  vessels  and nonstriated  muscles,  and mediates 
the visceral  functions. 
The cerebrospinal  and autonomic  nervous  systems  differ  from  each 
other  in their  efferent  pathways.  Table  7.1 shows  comparison  of the 
two systems. 
Table  7.1.  Comparison  of cerebrospinal  and  peripheral 
autonomic  nervous  systems 
Cerebrospinal  nervous 
system Peripheral  autonomic  nervous 
system 
The somatic  efferent  pathway  is 
made  up of one  neuron  which 
passes  directly  to the effector 
organ  (skeletal  muscles) 
Neuron 
I axon 
Skeletal  muscle The autonomic  efferent  pathway  is 
made  up of two neurons 
(preganglionic  and  postganglionic) 
with an intervening  ganglion  for the 
relay  of the preganglionic  fibre.  The 
effector  organ  (viscera)  are supplied 
by the postganglionic  fibre 
CELL  TYPES  OF NERVOUS  SYSTEM 
The nervous  tissue  is composed  of two distinct  types  of cells: 
(a) The  excitable  cells  are the nerve  cells  or neurons;  and 
(b) The  non-excitable  cells  constitute  neuroglia  and ependyma  in 
the CNS,  and Schwann  cells  in the PNS. 
1. Neuron 
Hach  nerve  cell or neuron  has: 
(a) A cell body  or perikaryon,  having  a central  nucleus  and Nissl 
granules  in its cytoplasm  (Fig.  7.4). 
140 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Brain 
Cervical  enlargement 
Spinal  ganglion 
Spinal  nerve 
Spinal  cord ^ t  Spinal  nerves  (31 pairs) 
C-1-
Cervical  nerves  (8 pairs) 
-C-8 
-T-1 -s 
Thoracic  nerves  (12 pairs) 
Lumbar  nerves  (5 pairs) 
- S-5 Sacral  nerves  (5 pairs) 
y Coccygeal  nerves  (1 pairs) 
Lateral  view T-12-
-L-1 
L-5- 1 
S-K Lumbar  -
enlargement 
Cauda  equina 
Fig. 7.3:  Central  Nervous  System  and  31 pairs  of spinal  nerves 
Nervous  System  I 141 
(b) Cell  processes  called  neurites,  which  are of two  types.  Many 
short  afferent  processes,  which  are  freely  branching  and 
varicose,  are called  dendrites. 
A single  long  efferent  process  called  axon,  which  may  give  off 
occasional  branches  (collaterals)  and is of uniform  diameter. 
The terminal  branches  of the axon  are called  axon  terminals  or 
telodendria. 
The cell bodies  (somata)  of the neurons  form  grey  matter  and 
nuclei  in the CNS,  and ganglia  in the PNS.  The  cell processes 
(axons)  form  tracts  in the CNS,  and nerves  in the PNS. 
Table  7.2 shows  the differences  between  axon  and dendrite. 
Table  7.2.  Comparison  of axon  and  dendrite 
Axon 
1. Only  one  axon  is present  in a 
neuron. 
2. Thin  long  process  of uniform 
thickness  and  smooth  surface. 
3. The  branches  of axon  are fewer 
and at right  angles  to the axon. 
4. Axon  contains  neurofibrils  and 
no Nissl  granules. 
5. Forms  the efferent  component 
of the impulse. Dendrite 
Usually  multiple  in a neuron. 
These  are short  multiple  processes. 
Their  thickness  diminishes  as these 
divide  repeatedly.  The  branches  are 
studded  with  spiny  projections. 
The dendrites  branch  profusely  and 
are given  off at acute  angles. 
Dendrites  contain  both  neurofibrils 
and Nissl  granules. 
Forms  the afferent  component  of the 
impulse. Cell body  (Soma) 
Initial  segment Node  of Ranvier  Schwann  cell 
of axon 
Axon  Myelin  sheath Termjna| 
boutons i\xon  hillock  \ / 
Nucleus  Myelin  sheath 
s" Dendrites 
Fig. 7.4:  Components  of a neuron  with  a peripheral  nerve 
142 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Types  of neurons:  Neurons  can be classified  in several  ways. 
I. According  to the number  of their  processes  (neurites)  they 
may be: 
(a) Unipolar,  e.g.  mesencephalic  nucleus; 
(b) Pseudo-unipolar,  e.g.  sensory  ganglia  or spinal  ganglia 
(Fig.  7.5); 
(c) Bipolar,  e.g. spiral  and vestibular  ganglia  and bipolar  neurons 
of retina. 
(d) Multipolar,  neurons  in cerebrum  and cerebellum. 
II. According  to the length  of axon,  the neurons  are classified  as 
(a) Golgi  type  I neurons,  with  a long  axon;  and 
(b) Golgi  type  II neurons  (microneurons),  with  a short  or no axon. 
Fig. 7.5:  Types  of neurons:  (a) Pseudounipolar,  (b) bipolar,  (c) multipolar (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Nervous  System  I 143 
Dynamic  polarity:  The  neurons  show  dynamic  polarity  in their 
processes.  The  impulse  flows  towards  the soma  in the dendrites,  and 
away  from  the soma  in the axon  (Fig.  7.6a).  However,  in certain 
microneurons,  where  the axon  is absent,  the impulse  can flow  in either 
direction  through  their  dendrites. 
Synapse:  The  neurons  form  long  chains  along  which  the impulses 
are conducted  in different  directions.  Each  junction  between  the neurons 
is called  a synapse  (Fig.  7.6b).  It is important  to know  that the contact 
between  the neurons  is by contiguity  and not by continuity.  This  is neuron 
theory  of Waldeyer  (1891).  The impulse  is transmitted  across  a synapse 
by specific  neurotransmitters,  like  acetylcholine,  catecholamines 
(noradrenalin  and dopamine),  serotonin,  histamine,  glycine,  GABA  and 
certain  polypeptides. 
Axon  of presynaptic  cell 7 » 
Inhibitory  input 
Axon  of 
presynap-
tic 
Synapses Postsynaptic 
element 
Transmitter  vesicles 
Mitochondria 
Presynaptic  terminal  -
Synaptic  cleft 
(200-300  angstroms) — Postsynaptic 
membrane 
Receptor  proteins 
Postsynaptic 
neuron 
Fig. 7.6:  (a) Neuron  and  its components,  (b)  Physiological  anatomy  of 
the synapse Myelinated  axon Axon  hillock 
-Soma 
Excitatory 
input  / 
144 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
The most  common  types  of the synapse  are axo-dendritic,  somato-
somatic,  somato-dendritic.  In synaptic  glomeruli,  groups  of axons  make 
contact  with  the dendrites  of one  or more  neurons  for complex 
interactions. 
Functionally,  a synapse  may  either  be inhibitory  or excitatory. 
2. Neuroglia 
The non-excitable  supporting  cells  of the nervous  system  form  a 
major  component  of the nervous  tissue.  These  cells  include  the 
following. 
1. Neuroglial  cells,  found  in the parenchyma  of brain  and  spinal 
cord. 
2. Ependymal  cells  lining  the internal  cavities  or ventricles. 
3. Capsular  or satellite  cells,  surrounding  neurons  of the sensory 
and autonomic  ganglia. 
4. Schwann  cells,  forming  sheaths  for axons  of peripheral  nerves. 
5. Several  types  of supporting  cells,  ensheathing  the motor  and 
sensory  nerve  terminals,  and supporting  the sensory  epithelia. 
The neuroglial  cells,  found  in the parenchyma  of brain  and spinal 
cord,  are broadly  classified  as : 
A. Macroglia,  of ectodermal  (neural)  origin,  comprising  astrocytes, 
oligodendrocytes,  and glioblasts. 
B. Microglia,  of mesodermal  origin. 
All glial  cells  are much  smaller  but far more  numerous  than  the nerve 
cells. 
(a) Astrocytes:  As the name  suggests,  these  cells  are star-shaped 
because  of their  numerous  processes  radiating  in all directions. 
Astrocytes  are of two  types. 
Protoplasmic  astrocytes,  with  thick  and symmetrical  processes 
are found  in the grey  matter. 
Fibrous  astrocytes,  with  thin  and asymmetrical  processes,  are 
found  in the white  matter. 
The processes  of astrocytes  often  end in plate-like  expansions 
on the blood  vessels,  ependyma,  and pial  surface  of the CNS 
(Fig.  7.7). 
The functions  of various  glial  cells  are enumerated  below. 
Nervous  System  I 145 
(b) Oligodendrocytes:  As the name  suggests  these  cells  have 
fewer  cell  processes.  According  to their  distribution,  the 
oligodendrocytes  may  be intrafascicular,  or perineuronal. 
The intrafascicular  cells  are found  in the myelinated  tracts. 
The perineuronal  cells  are seen  on the surface  of the somata 
of neurons. 
(c) Glioblast:  These  are stem  cells  which  can  differentiate  into 
macroglial  cells.  They  are particularly  numerous  beneath  the 
ependyma. 
(d) Microglia:  These  are the smallest  of the glial  cells  which  have 
a flattened  cell body  with  a few short,  fine  processes. 
They  are often  related  to capillaries,  and are said to be phagocytic 
in nature. 
Microglial  cells  are possibly  derived  from  the circulating 
monocytes  which  migrate  into  the CNS  during  the late foetal 
and early  postnatal  life. 
Functions  of Glial  and  Ependymal  Cells 
1. They  provide  mechanical  support  to neurons. 
2. Because  of their  non-conducting  nature,  the glial  cells  act as Fig. 7.7:  Types  of neuroglia Microglia Oligodendrocytes _ , . ,  Capillary  Fibrous  astrocyte 
Protoplasmic  astrocyte Capillary 
146 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
insulators  between  the neurons  and  prevent  neuronal  impulses 
from  spreading  in unwanted  directions. 
3. They  can  remove  the  foreign  material  and  cell  debris  by 
phagocytosis. 
4. They  can  repair  the damaged  areas  of nervous  tissue.  By 
proliferation  (gliosis)  they  form  glial  scar  tissue,  and fill the gaps 
left by degenerated  neurons. 
5. Glial  cells  can take  up and store  neurotransmitters  released  by 
the neighbouring  synapses.  These  can either  be metabolized  or 
released  again  from  the glial  cells. 
6. They  help  in neuronal  functions  by maintaining  a suitable  metabolic 
and ionic  environment  for the neurons. 
7. Oligodendrocytes  myelinate  tracts. 
8. Ependymal  cells  are concerned  with  exchanges  of materials 
between  brain  and CSF. 
BLOOD-BRAIN  BARRIER 
Certain  dyes,  when  injected  intravenously,  fail to stain  the parenchyma 
of brain  and spinal  cord,  although  they  pass  easily  into  the non-nervous 
tissues.  However,  the same  dyes,  when  injected  into  the ventricles, 
enter  the. brain  substances  easily.  This  indicates  that a barrier  exists  at 
the capillary  level  between  the blood  and  nerve  cells.  The  possible 
structures  constituting  the blood-brain  barrier  are as follows. 
(a) Capillary  endothelium  without  fenestrations. 
(b) Basement  membrane  of the endothelium. 
(c) The  end feet  of astrocytes  covering  the capillary  walls. 
The barrier  permits  a selective  passage  of blood  contents  to the 
nervous  tissue,  and thus  the toxic  and harmful  substances  are ordinarily 
prevented  from  reaching  the brain. 
REFLEX  ARC 
A reflex  arc is the basic  functional  unit  of the nervous  system  which 
can perform  an integrated  neural  activity.  In its simplest  form,  i.e. 
mono-synaptic  reflex  arc, is made  up of: 
(a) A receptor,  e.g. skin; 
(b) A sensory  or afferent  neuron; 
Nervous  System  I 147 
(c) A motor  or efferent  neuron;  and 
(d) An effector,  e.g. muscle. 
The complex  forms  of reflex  arc are polysynaptic  due to addition  of 
one or more  internuncial  neurons  (interneurons)  in between  the afferent 
and efferent  neurons  (Fig.  7.8). 
An involuntary  motor  response  of the body  is called  a reflex  action. 
The stretch  reflexes  (tendon  jerks)  are the examples  of monosynaptic 
reflexes  (Fig.  7.9)  whereas  the withdrawal  reflex  (response  to a painful 
stimulus)  is a polysynaptic  reflex. 
PERIPHERAL  NERVES 
The nerves  are solid  white  cords  composed  of bundles  (fasciculi)  of 
nerve  fibres. 
Each  nerve  fibre  is an axon  with  its coverings. 
The nerve  fibres  are supported  and  bound  together  by connective 
tissue  sheaths  at different  levels  of organization  of the nerve.  The whole 
nerve  trunk  is ensheathed  by epineurium,  each  fasciculus  by 
perineurium,  and  each  nerve  fibre  by a delicate  endoneurium.  The 
toughness  of a nerve  is due to its fibrous  sheaths,  otherwise  the nerve 
tissue  itself  is very  delicate  and friable  (Fig.  7.10). 
SPINAL  NERVES 
There  are 31 pairs  of spinal  nerves,  including  8 cervical,  12 thoracic, 
5 lumbar,  5 sacral,  and 1 coccygeal. Dorsal  root 
ganglion  \ 
Skin \ 
Peripheral 
Sensorv  fibre  P roces s / Dorsal  root 
Central 
process Posterior 
horn 
Motor  fibre 
Skeletal 
muscle Lateral  hor n / '  Anterior 
Ventral  root  Motor  neuron  hnm 
Fig. 7.8:  Polysynaptic  reflex 
148 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Fig. 7.10:  Fibrous  support  of the nerve  fibres Muscle  spindle-
Quadriceps  femoris-
prime  mover 1st fibre 
Semitendinosus 
antagonist  muscle 
Fig. 7.9:  Reflex  arc of the stretch  reflex 
Schwann  cell  -
Node  of Ranvier  -Epineurium 
Perineurium 
Endoneurium 
Myelin  sheath 
Axon 
Nervous  System  I 149 
Area  of skin  supplied  by a single  segment  of spinal  cord  is called  a 
dermatome  (Fig.  7.11).  Each  spinal  nerve  is connected  with  the spinal 
cord by two  roots,  a ventral  root  which  is motor,  and  a dorsal  root 
which  is sensory  (Fig.  7.12). 
The dorsal  root  is characterized  by the presence  of a spinal  ganglion 
at its distal  end.  In the majority  of nerves  the ganglion  lies  in the 
intervertebral  foramen. 
The ventral  and  dorsal  nerve  roots  unite  together  within  the 
intervertebral  foramen  to form  the spinal  nerve. 
The nerve  emerges  through  the intervertebral  foramen,  gives  off 
recurrent  meningeal  branches,  and then  divides  immediately  into a dorsal 
and a ventral  ramus. 
Fig. 7.11:  Dermatomes:  (a) Anterior  aspect,  (b) Posterior  aspect Anterior 
aspect 
L4 
L5 
S1 Posterior 
aspect 
-S2 
—S1 
L5 
-S1 
150 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
The dorsal  ramus  passes  backwards  and  supplies  the intrinsic 
muscles  of the back,  and the skin  covering  them. 
The ventral  ramus  is connected  with  the sympathetic  ganglion,  and 
is distributed  to the limb  or the anterolateral  body  wall. 
In case  of a typical  (thoracic)  spinal  nerve,  the ventral  ramus  does 
not mix with  neighbouring  rami,  and gives  off several  muscular  branches, 
a lateral  cutaneous  branch,  and an anterior  cutaneous  branch.  However, 
the ventral  rami  of other  spinal  nerves  are plaited  to form  the nerve 
plexuses  for the limbs,  like the brachial  plexus,  lumbar  plexus,  etc. 
Nerve  Plexuses  for Limbs 
All nerve  plexuses  are formed  only  by the ventral  rami,  and never  bv 
the dorsal  rami. 
These  supply  the limbs. 
Against  each  plexus  the spinal  cord  is enlarged,  e.g.  'cervical 
enlargement'  for the brachial  plexus,  and 'lumbar  enlargement'  for the 
lumbosacral  plexus.  Plexus  formation  resembles  a tree (Fig.  7.13). Dorsal  root  with 
spinal  ganglion 
Ventral 
primary 
ramus 
Lateral  -
cutaneous 
branch Sympathetic  ganglion 
with grey  and  white 
rami  communicans \ Ventral  root 
Trunk Dorsal  primary  ramus 
- Anterior  cutaneous  branch 
Fig. 7.12:  Course  of typical  thoracic  spinal  nerve 
Nervous  System  I 151 
Fig. 7.13:  Nerve  plexus  likened  to a tree 
Each  nerve  root  of the plexus  (ventral  ramus)  divides  into  a ventral, 
a dorsal  division. 
The ventral  division  supplies  the flexor  compartment,  and the dorsal 
division,  the extensor  compartment,  of the limb. 
The flexor  compartment  has a richer  nerve  supply  than  the extensor 
compartment.  The  flexor  skin  is more  sensitive  than  the extensor  skin, 
and the flexor  muscles  (antigravity,  bulkier  muscles)  are more  efficient 
and are under  a more  precise  control  than  the coarse  extensor  muscles. 
The plexus  formation  (Fig.  7.14)  is a physiological  or functional 
adaptation,  and is perhaps  the result  of the following  special  features  in 
the limbs. 
1. Overlapping  of dermatomes 
2. Overlapping  of myotomes 
3. Composite  nature  of muscles 
4. Possible  migration  of muscles  from  the trunk  to the limbs;  and 
5. Linkage  of the opposite  groups  of muscles  in the spinal  cord  for 
reciprocal  innervation. -Division 
-Trunk Branches 
Cord 
Roots 
152 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Fig. 7.14:  Brachial  plexus 
Blood  and  Nerve  Supply  of Peripheral  Nerves 
The peripheral  nerves  are supplied  by vessels,  called  vasa  nervorum, 
which  form  longitudinal  anastomoses  on the surface  of the nerves.  The 
nerves  distributed  to the sheaths  of the nerve  trunks  are called  nervi 
nervorum. 
NERVE  FIBRES 
Each  nerve  fibre  is an axon  with  its coverings. 
Larger  axons  are covered  by a myelin  sheath  and  are termed 
myelinated  or medullated  fibres. 
The fatty  nature  of myelin  is responsible  for the glistening  whiteness 
of the peripheral  nerve  trunks  and white  matter  of the CNS. 
Thinner  axons,  of less  than  one  micron  diameter,  do not have  the 
myelin  sheath  and  are therefore  termed  non-myelinated  or  non-
medullated  (Fig.  7.15). Roots 
C5 
C6 
C7 
C8 
T, 
Nervous  System  I 153 
r Schwann  cell 
Myelinated  axon 
Fig. 7.15:  Unmyelinated  and  myelinated  axons 
However,  all the fibres  whether  myelinated  or non-myelinated  have 
a neurolemmal  sheath,  which  is uniformly  absent  in the tracts.  In 
peripheral  nerves,  both  the myelin  and neurolemmal  sheaths  are derived 
from  Schwann  cells. 
Myelinated  Fibres 
Myelinated  fibres  form  the bulk  of the somatic  nerves.  Structurally, 
they are made  up of following  parts  from  within  outwards. 
1. Axis  cylinder  forms  the central  core  of the fibre.  It consists  of 
axoplasm  covered  by axolemma  (Fig.  7.16). 
2. Myelin  sheath,  derived  from  Schwann  cells,  surrounds  the axis 
cylinder.  It is made  up of alternate  concentric  layers  of lipids  and 
proteins  formed  by spiralization  of the mesaxon;  the lipids  include 
cholesterol,  glycolipids  and phospholipids. 
Myelin  sheath  is interrupted  at regular  intervals  called  the nodes 
of Ranvier  where  the adjacent  Schwann  cells  meet. 
Collateral  branches  of the axon  arise  at the nodes  of Ranvier. 
Thicker  axons  possess  a thicker  coat  of myelin  and  longer 
internodes. Unmyelinated  axon 
Fig. 7.16:  Components  of a nerve 
Each  internode  is myelinated  by one Schwann  cell.  Oblique  clefts 
in the myelin,  called  incisures  of Schmidt  Lantermann,  provide 
conduction  channels  for metabolites  into  the depth  of the myelin 
and to the subjacent  axon. 
Myelin  sheath  acts  as an insulator  for the nerve  fibres. 
3. Neurolemmal  sheath  (sheath  of Schwann)  surrounds  the myelin 
sheath. 
It represents  the plasma  membrane  (basal  lamina)  of the Schwann 
cell. 
Beneath  the membrane  there  lies a thin layer  of cytoplasm  with 
the nucleus  of the Schwann  cell. 
The sheaths  of two  cells  interdigitate  at the nodes  of Ranvier. 
Neurolemmal  sheath  is necessary  for regeneration  of a damaged 
nerve. 
Tracts  do not regenerate  because  of absence  of neurolemmal 
sheath. 
4. Endoneurium  is a delicate  connective  tissue  sheath  which 
surrounds  the neurolemmal  sheath. 
Non-Myelinated  Fibres 
Non-myelinated  fibres  comprise  the smaller  axons  of the CNS,  in addition 
to peripheral  postganglionic  autonomic  fibres,  several  types  of fine 
sensory  fibres  (C fibres  of skin,  muscle  and viscera),  olfactory  nerves, 
etc. Structurally,  a 'non-myelinated  fibre'  consists  of a group  of small 
axons  (0.12-2  microns  diameter)  that  have  invaginated  separately  a 
single  Schwann  cell (in series)  without  any spiralling  of the mesaxon 154 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Initial  segment Node  of Ranvier  Schwann  cell 
of axon Cell body  (Soma) 
Axon  hillock 
Nucleus  Myelin  sheath 
Dendrites Axon  Myelin  sheath Termjna| 
boutons 
Nervous  System  I 155 
(Fig.  7.15).  The endoneurium,  instead  of ensheathing  individual  axons, 
surrounds  all the neurolemmal  sheath  by virtue  of which  the 
non-myelinated  fibres,  like  the myelinated  fibres,  can regenerate  after 
damage. 
Classification  of Peripheral  Nerve  Fibres 
A. According  to their  function,  the cranial  nerves  have  following 
nuclear  columns: 
1. General  somatic  efferent,  to supply  striated  muscles  of somatic 
origin,  e.g. Ill, IV, VI, XII. 
2. Special  visceral  efferent  (branchial  efferent)  to supply 
striated  muscles  of branchial  origin,  e.g. V, VII,  IX, X, XI. 
3. General  visceral  efferent  to supply  smooth  muscles  and 
glands,  e.g. Ill, VII,  IX, X. 
4. General  visceral  afferent,  to carry  visceroceptive  impulses 
(like pain)  from  the viscera,  e.g. X. 
5. Special  visceral  afferent,  to carry  the sensation  of taste,  e.g. 
VII, IX, X. 
6. General  somatic  afferent,  to carry  exteroceptive  impulses 
from  the skin  of face  and proprioceptive  impulses  from  the 
muscles,  tendons  and joints  (Fig.  7.17),  e.g. V. 
7. Special  somatic  afferent  to carry  the sensations  of smell  vision, 
hearing  and equilibrium,  e.g. VIII. 
Special  somatic  afferent 
General  somatic  afferent 
Special  visceral  afferent 
General  visceral  afferent 
General  visceral  efferent 
Special  visceral  efferent 
General  somatic  efferent 
Fig. 7.17:  Functional  nuclear  columns  of cranial  nerves 
B.According  to their  size  and  speed  of conduction,  the nerve 
fibres  are divided  into  three  categories,  namely  A, B and C. These 
have  been  compared  in Table  7.3. 
156 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Table  7.3.  Comparison  of types  of nerve  fibres 
Group  A fibre Group  B fibre Group  C fibre 
1. Thickest  and  fastest Medium  size Thinnest  and  slowest 
2. Myelinated Myelinated Non-myelinated 
3. Diameter Diameter Diameter 
1.5-22  micron 1.5-3.4  micron 0.1-2  micron 
4. Speed: Speed: Speed: 
4-120  metres/sec 3-15  metres/sec 0.5-4  metres/sec 
e.g. skeletomotor  fibre, e.g. preganglionic e.g. postganglionic 
(aA),  fusimotor  fibre autonomic  efferents autonomic  efferents, 
afferent  to skin, afferent  fibre  to skin, 
muscles  and  tendons muscle  and  viscera 
5. Fast conduction Slow  conduction Very slow  conduction 
AUTONOMIC  NERVOUS  SYSTEM 
Autonomic  nervous  system  controls  involuntary  activities  of the body, 
like sweating,  salivation,  peristalsis,  etc. It differs  fundamentally  from 
the somatic  nervous  system  in having: 
(a) The  preganglionic  fibres  arising  from  the CNS; 
(b) The  ganglia  for relay  of the preganglionic  fibres;  and 
(c) The  postganglionic  fibres  arising  from  the ganglia  which  supply 
the effectors  (smooth  muscles  and glands). 
In contrast,  the somatic  nerves  after  arising  from  the CNS  reach 
their destination  without  any interruption  (Fig.  7.1). 
Autonomic  nervous  system  is divided  into  two  more  or less 
complementary  parts,  the sympathetic  and parasympathetic  systems. 
The sympathetic  activities  are widespread  and diffuse,  and combat 
the acute  emergencies. 
The parasympathetic  activities  are usually  discrete  and isolated,  and 
provide  a comfortable  environment. 
Both  systems  function  in absolute  coordination  and adjust  the body 
involuntarily  to the given  surroundings. 
SYMPATHETIC  NERVOUS  SYSTEM 
1. It is also  known  as 'thoracolumbar'  outflow  because  it arises 
from  lateral  horn  of T1 to L2 segments  of the spinal  cord  (Fig-
7.18 and ©of  Fig.  7.20a). 
Nervous  System  I 157 
Fig. 7.18.  Plan  of sympathetic  nervous  system.  Green  line:  afferent  from 
viscera.  Red  line:  preganglionic  fibres.  Red  dotted  lines:  postganglionic 
fibres 
2. The medullated  preganglionic  fibres  (white  rami  communicantes) 
arise  from  the lateral  column  of the spinal  cord,  emerge  through 
the ventral  rami  where  the white  rami  are connected  to the ganglia 
of the sympathetic  chain  (Fig.  7.19  and © of Fig.  7.20a). 
3. Preganglionic  fibres  relay  either  in the lateral  ganglia  (sympathetic 
chain)  or in the collateral  ganglia,  e.g. the coeliac  ganglion  (© of 
Fig. 7.20a).  The non-medullated  post-ganglionic  fibres  run for some 
distance  before  reaching  the organ  of supply  (© & © of Fig. 7.20a). 
The adrenal  medulla  is a unique  exception  in the body;  it is supplied 
by the preganglionic  fibres  (® of Fig. 7.20a). 
4. Sympathetic  nerve  endings  are adrenergic  in nature,  meaning 
thereby  that noradrenalin  is produced  for neurotransmission.  The 
only exception  to this general  rule are the cholinergic  sympathetic 
nerves  supplying  the sweat  glands  and  skeletal  muscle  vessels 
for vasodilatation. 
5. Functionally,  sympathetic  nerves  are vasomotor  (vasocons-
trictor),  sudomotor  (secretomotor  to sweat  glands),  and pilomotor Sympathetic 
trunk  , 
Arrector^ 
pilorum  muscle 
Sweat  gland  ^ 
Blood  vessel  to skeletal  muscle Viscera 
Adrenal  gland-Collateral 
ganglion  \ Arteriole 
in dermis - Lateral  horn 
158 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(contract  the arrector  pili and cause  erection  of hair)  in the skin 
of limbs  and  body  wall  (® & © of Fig.  7.20a).  In addition, 
sympathetic  activity  causes  dilation  of pupil,  pale  face,  dry mouth, 
tachycardia,  rise in blood  pressure,  inhibition  of hollow  viscera, 
and closure  of the perineal  sphincters. 
The blood  supply  to the skeletal  muscles,  heart  and  brain  is 
markedly  increased. 
Thus,  sympathetic  reactions  tend  to be 'mass  reactions',  widely 
diffused  in their  effect  and that they  are directed  towards  mobilization 
of the resources  of the body  for expenditure  of energy  in dealing  with 
the emergencies  or emotional  crises  (fright,  fight,  flight). 
Ventral 
Ganglion  of" 
sympathetic  trunk 
Collateral 
ganglion^ 
Viscera.. Spinal  ganglion 
Somatic 
efferent  fibres 
Somatic 
afferent 
fibres 
Splanchnic 
afferent  fibres 
Sympathetic  trunk Lateral  grey  horn 
Dorsal  ramus 
Grey  ramus ramus 
White 
ramus 
Preganglionic  fibres 
Postganglionic 
fibres 
Fig. 7.19:  Pathways  of sympathetic  and somatic  nerves.  Splanchnic  afferent 
fibres  (green).  Sympathetic  preganglionic  efferent  fibres  (red).  Sympathetic 
postganglionic  efferent  fibres  (red  dotted).  Somatic  efferent  fibres  (black). 
Somatic  afferent  fibres  (green). 
PARASYMPATHETIC  NERVOUS  SYSTEM 
1. It is also  known  as craniosacral  outflow  because  it arises  from 
the brain  (mixed  with  III, VII,  IX and X cranial  nerves)  and sacral 
2-A segments  of the spinal  cord.  Thus  it has a cranial  and a sacral 
part. 
Nervous  System  I 159 
Superior  cervical 
ganglion -Tarsal  muscle 
Eye:  dialator 
of pupil 
Submandibular  and 
sublingual  glands 
Parotid  gland 
Heart 
Bronchial  tree 
Stomach 
Adrenal 
medulla 
Small  intestine 
Large 
intestine 
Ductus  deferens 
Fig. 7.20(a):  Sympathetic  nervous  system 
2. The  preganglionic  fibres  are very  long,  reaching  right  upto  the 
viscera  of supply.  The  ganglia,  called  terminal  ganglia,  are 
situated  mostly  on the viscera  and,  therefore,  the postganglionic 
fibres  are  very  short. 
3. Parasympathetic  nerve  endings  are cholinergic  in nature,  similar 
to the somatic  nerves. Inferior 
mesenteric 
olexus Coeliac  plexus Spinal  cord To blood  vessesl,  arrector  pili muscles,  and  sweat  glands 
Sym.  trunk Sym.  trunk 
160 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Small 
intestine 
Large 
intestine Trachea 
Stomach 
Urinary 
bladder 
""iS 
\1 Genital 
1111  erectile 
\t)j tissue Pelvic 
splanchnic 
nerves Edinger-Westphal 
nucleus 
Lacrimatory 
nucleus 
Superior  salivatory 
nucleus 
Inferior 
nucleus 
Dorsal  motor 
nucleus  of 
vagus  nerve Heart Pterygopalatine  gan^^ 
Submand.  < 
gang. Lacrimal  and 
nasal  glands 
Submandibular 
and sublingual 
glands 
Parotid 
gland Ciliary  gang. Eye: pupil 
constrictor, 
Ciliary  body 
Fig. 7.20(b):  Parasympathetic  nervous  system Medulla  Pons  Midbra in 
S-2 
S-3 
S-4 . Spinal  cord 
Nervous  System  I 161 
4. Functionally,  parasympathetic  activity  is seen  when  the subject 
is fully  relaxed.  His pupils  are constricted,  lenses  accommodated, 
face flushed,  mouth  moist,  pulse  slow,  blood  pressure  low,  bladder 
and gut contracting,  and the perineal  sphincters  relaxed. 
In general  the effects  of parasympathetic  activity  are usually  discrete 
and isolated,  and directed  towards  conservation  and restoration  of the 
resources  of energy  in the body. 
Table  7.4 shows  the comparison  between  the two  systems. 
Table  7.4.  Comparison  of parasympathetic  and  sympathetic  nervous 
systems 
Parasympathetic  nervous  Sympathetic  nervous  system 
system 
1. All neurons  forming  this  system 
originate  from  brain  (III, VII, IX, X 
cranial  nerves)  and  S2-S4 
segment  of spinal  cord.  So it is 
called  "craniosacral  outflow" 
2. Pre-ganglionic  fibres  are very 
long reaching  upto  terminal 
ganglia  mostly  on viscera 
Post-ganglionic  fibres  are  short 
3. Nerve  endings  are cholinergic 
in nature 
4. Functionally,  it is seen  when 
subject  is fully  relaxed. 
Parasympathetic  system  has 
no effect  on skin 
5. Effect  is discrete,  isolated, 
directed  towards  conservation 
and restoration  of the resources 
of energy  in the body 
6. It only  supplies  viscera All neurons  forming  this  system 
originate  from  T1 to L2 segment  of 
spinal  cord 
So it is called  "thoracolumbar  outlow" 
Pre-ganglionic  fibres  are short,  relay 
either  in lateral  ganglia  or collateral 
ganglia 
Post-ganglionic  fibres  are long 
Nerve  endings  are adrenergic  in 
nature  except  in sweat  gland 
Functionally,  sympathetic  nerves  are 
vasomotor,  sudomotorand  pilomotor 
to skin,  it is seen  when  subject  is in 
fear, fight  and flight  position.  It dilates 
skeletal  muscle  blood  vessels 
Effect  is widely  diffused  and directed 
towards  mobilization  of resources 
and expenditure  of energy  during 
emergency  and  emotional  crisis 
It supplies  visceral  blood  vessels, 
skin.  Afferents  from  viscera  and 
specific  area  of skin  reach  the same 
spinal  segment  to go  to the 
cerebrum.  Since  pain  is better 
appreciated  from  the skin,  it appears 
to be coming  from  skin  rather  than 
the viscera.  This  is the  basis  of 
referred  pain  (Fig.  7.21) 
162 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Fig. 7.21.  (a) Referred  pain  area  of skin  where  pain  of viscera  is felt; 
(b) Diagram  of the way  in which  convergence  in the dorsal  horn  cell  may 
cause  referred  pain Gall bladder. 
Stomach,  duodenum 
Small  intestine  — 
Large  intestine Spleen 
Hearl 
Somatic 
structure 
Viscus Spinothalamic  tract 
To brain 
Nervous  System  I 163 
CLINICAL  ANATOMY 
• Irritation  of a motor  nerve  causes  muscular  spasm.  Mild  irritation 
of a sensory  nerve  causes  tingling  and numbness,  but when  severe  it 
causes  pain  along  the distribution  of the nerve.  Irritation  of a mixed 
nerve  causes  combined  effects. 
• Damage  to a motor  nerve  causes  muscular  paralysis,  and  damage 
to a sensory  nerve  causes  localized  anaesthesia  and  analgesia. 
Damage  to a mixed  nerve  gives  rise to both  the sensory  and motor 
losses. 
Regeneration  of a damaged  nerve  depends  on the degree  of injury, 
particularly  on the continuity  of the nerve.  Different  degrees  of nerve 
injury  are expressed  by the following  three  terms. 
(a) Neurapraxia  is a minimal  lesion  causing  transient  functional 
block  without  any degeneration.  Recovery  is spontaneous  and 
complete,  e.g. sleeping  foot. 
(b) Axonotmesis  is a lesion  where,  although  continuity  is preserved, 
true Wallerian  degeneration  occurs.  Regeneration  takes  place 
in due course. 
(c) Neurotmesis  is the complete  division  of a nerve.  For regeneration 
to occur  the cut ends  must  be sutured  (Fig.  7.22). 
Fig. 7.22:  Effects  of apposition  and  no apposition  of cut ends  of nerve 
on muscle  fibres Proper  apposition  by suturing Regenerating  muscle  fibres 
No apposition 
Neuroma  Degenerating 
muscle  fibres 
164 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
• Severe  pain  along  the distribution  of a nerve  is called  neuralgia. 
Inflammation  of a nerve  is marked  by neuralgia  with  sensory  and 
motor  deficits,  and is called  neuritis. 
• Denervation  of a part produces  trophic  changes.  The  skin  becomes 
dry (no sweating),  smooth  (loss  of hair)  and glazed;  trophic  ulcers 
may develop  which  do not heal  easily.  In patients  with  leprosy, 
repeated  painless  injuries  to the tips of the fingers  and toes  makes 
them  worn  out and blunted. 
A joint  after  denervation  becomes  a neuropathic  (Charcot's)  joint, 
which  shows  painless  swelling;  excessive  mobility  and  bony 
destruction.  The  common  medical  diseases  associated  with  trophic 
changes  are leprosy,  tabes  dorsalis,  and syringomyelia.  The bed sores 
in paralysed  patients  are examples  of the trophic  ulcers.  In general 
the ulcers  and  wounds  in the denervated  skin  do not heal  easily 
(Fig.  7.23). 
Fig. 7.23.  Pressure  sore 
• Neuropathies  is a group  of diseases  of peripheral  nerve.  It is of 
two types: 
- Polyneuropathy:  Several  neurons  are affected  and usually  long 
neurons  like  those  supplying  the feet  and legs  are affected  first. 
This occurs  mostly  due to nutritional  deficiencies  (folic  acid  and 
vitamin  B), metabolic  disorders  (diabetes  mellitus),  chronic  diseases 
(renal  and hepatic  failure  and carcinoma),  infections  (influenza, 
measles  and  typhoid  fever)  and  toxic  reactions  (arsenic,  lead, 
mercury  and carbon  tetrachloride) 
Nervous  System  I 165 
- Mononeuropathy:  Usually  one  neuron  is affected  and most 
common  cause  is ischaemia  due  to pressure.  The  resultant 
dysfunction  depends  on site and  degree  of injury. 
• Bell's  palsy  is the compression  of a facial  nerve  in or just outside 
stylomastoid  foramen  due to inflammation  and oedema  of the nerve. 
This causes  paralysis  of facial  muscles  and loss  of facial  expression 
on the affected  side  (Fig.  7.24). 
• Acute  idiopathic  inflammatory  polyneuropathy  (Guillain-Barre 
syndrome)  is a sudden,  acute  and progressive  bilateral  ascending 
paralysis  which  starts  at the lower  limb  and then  spreads  to arms, 
trunks  and  cranial  nerves.  It is characterized  by widespread 
inflammation  with  some  demyelination  of spinal  and cranial  nerves 
and the spinal  ganglia. 
• Syringomyelia  is the dilation  of the central  canal  of the spinal  cord. 
Dilation  of central  canal  develops  pressure  which  causes  progressive 
damage  to sensory  and motor  neurons.  Early  effects  are insensibility 
to heat  and pain  (dissociated  anaesthesia)  and in long  term  there  is 
destruction  of motor  and sensory  tracts  leading  to paralysis  and loss 
of sensation  and reflexes.  This  occurs  most  commonly  in the cervical 
region  and  is associated  with  congenital  abnormality  of the distal 
end of the fourth  ventricle. Fig. 7.24.  Bell's  palsy  on left side  of face 
166 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
• Ageing:  Usually  after  60-70  years  or so there  are changes  in the 
brain.  These  are: 
(a) Prominence  of sulci  due to cortical  shrinkage. 
(b) The  gyri  get narrow  and sulci  get broad. 
(c) The  subarachnoid  space  becomes  wider.  There  is enlargement 
of the ventricles. 
• Dementia:  In this condition,  there  is slow  and progressive  loss  of 
memory,  intellect  and personality.  The  consciousness  of the subject 
is normal.  Dementia  usually  occurs  due to Alzheimer's  disease. 
Alzheimer's  disease:  The  changes  of normal  aging  are pronounced 
in the parietal  lobe,  temporal  lobe,  and in the hippocampus  (Fig.  7.25). 
• Infections  of brain:  (a) Bacterial,  (b) Viral,  (c) Miscellaneous  types. 
(a) Bacterial  (through  blood)  may  cause  meningitis  or brain  abscess. 
Otitis  media  may  cause  meningitis  or temporal  lobe  abscess. 
Tuberculosis:  TB meningitis  is due to blood-borne  infection. 
(b) Viral  infections:  Most  viruses  enter  through  blood.  Viruses  may 
cause  meningitis  or encephalitis. Normal  brain  Alzheimer's  disease  brain 
Normal  arachnoid  villi En|arged  arachnoid m 
^ Enlarged 
j; subarachnoid 
A space 
Grey  matter  gets  thin 
Fig. 7.25:  Changes  in the  elderly  brain 
Nervous  System  I 167 
Herpes  simplex  virus  and  encephalitis:  This  vims  usually 
causes  vesicles  at angles  of the mouth  and  alae  of the nose, 
following  cold  or any other  disease.  In some  cases  it may  cause 
encephalitis. 
Herpes  zoster:  It presents  as a vesicular  rash  affecting  one or 
more  dermatomes.  This  condition  is very  painful  (Fig.  7.26). 
Poliomyelitis:  The  virus  has attraction  for anterior  (motor)  horn 
cells,  especially  of the spinal  cord  which  get damaged.  The nerves 
arising  from  these  neurons  get affected  resulting  in paresis  or 
paralysis.  There  may  be partial  or complete  recovery. 
(c) Miscellaneous  types,  i.e. infestations  and infections. 
1. Fungal  infections:  Primary  infections  of fungus  of brain  in 
healthy  adults  are rare.  The  fungus  infections  usually  occur 
in AIDS  (acquired  immunodeficiency  syndrome). 
2. Protozoal  infections: 
- Malaria:  Acute  malaria  by P. falciparum  may  cause 
cerebral  malaria.  It is very  serious  condition  and may  cause 
death  unless  treated  well  in time 
- African  sleeping  sickness:  The  tsetse  fly transmits 
T. brucei  infection  in man  resulting  in meningoencephalitis. 
- Cysticercosis:  The  larvae  of tapeworm  (Taenia  solium) 
may form  a cyst in the brain.  This  cyst  may  cause  epilepsy. Vesicular  rash 
Fig. 7.26:  Herpes  zoster 
168 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
3. Parkinson's  disease:  the extrapyramidal  system  which 
connects  the higher  centers  and  the anterior  horn  cells  get 
affected  in this  disease.  There  is usually  deficiency  of 
neurotransmitter  dopamine  in the affected  nuclei  of the 
extrapyramidal  system,  including  depigmentation  of substantia 
nigra  (Fig.  7.27). 
The face  is mask  like and expressionless,  the posture  is bent 
forwards  with  stiff  pill-rolling  tremors  of the hands. 
4. Encephalopathy:  This  condition  occurs  due to lack of vitamin 
B, especially  in people  who  are chronic  alcoholics. 
5. Upper  motor  neuron  damage:  When  the  fibres  are 
interrupted  from  their  cortical  origin  till these  synapse  with 
anterior  horn  cells  of the spinal  cord.  The  tendon  jerks  are 
exaggerated  and  the plantar  reflex  is of the extensor  type. 
6. Lower  motor  neuron  damage:  When  the anterior  horn  cells 
(motor  neurons)  are affected,  usually  by poliomyelitis  virus, 
there  is paresis  or paralysis  of the muscles  supplied  by the Fig. 7.27:  Gait  in Parkinsonism 
Nervous  System  I 169 
nerves  arising  from  the affected  neurons.  The  affected 
muscles  atrophy,  and reflexes  are absent. 
7. Leprosy:  There  is chronic  inflammation  of the nerve  sheaths. 
It is mostly  associated  with  fibrosis  and degeneration  of the 
nerve  fibres  and autoamputation  (Fig.  7.28). 
Fig. 7.28:  Leprosy 
8. Epilepsy:  Epilepsy  occurs  in 1% population.  There  is focus 
of hyperexcitable  neurons,  which  get induced  by various  types 
of stimuli,  causing  seizures.  25%  cases  of epilepsy  are 
associated  with  some  known  disease,  while  75%  do not show 
any genetic  influence. 
8 
Skin and Fasciae 
SKIN 
Synonyms 
1. Cutis  (L);  2. Derma  (G);  3. Integument.  Compare  with  the terms 
cutaneous,  dermatology  and dermatomes. 
Definition 
Skin is the general  covering  of the entire  external  surface  of the body, 
including  the external  auditory  meatus  and the outer  surface  of tympanic 
membrane. 
It is continuous  with  the mucous  membrane  at the orifices  of the body. 
Because  of a large  number  of its functions,  the skin  is regarded  as 
an important  organ  of the body  (Fig.  8.1). 
Surface  Area 
In an adult  the surface  area  of the skin  is 1.5-2  (average  1.7)  sq. 
metres.  In order  to assess  the area  involved  in burns,  one can follow 
the rule  of nine:  head  and neck  9%;  each  upper  limb  9%;  the front  of 
the trunk  18%;  the back  of the trunk  (including  buttocks)  18%;  each 
lower  limb  18%;  and perineum  1 % (Fig.  8.2). 
The surface  area  of an individual  can  be calculated  by Du Bois 
formula.  Thus,  A = W x H x 71.84,  where  A = surface  area  in sq. cm, 
W= weight  in kg, and H= height  in cm. 
Pigmentation  of Skin 
The colour  of the skin  is determined  by at least  five  pigments  present 
at different  levels  and places  of the skin.  These  are: 
172 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Fig. 8.1.  Histological  structure  of skin Sweat  pores 
Hair Arrector  pili muscle 
nerve  ending 
Sebaceous  gland 
Meissner's  corpuscle 
(sensitive  to touch) 
Sweat  duct 
Pacinian  corpuscle 
(sensitive  to heavy 
pressure) 
Sensory  nerve 
Sweat  gland 
Adipose  tissue 
Artery 
Vein 
Autonomic  motor  nerve Epidermis^ 
Capillary 
loop 
Dermis 
Hair follicle 
Subcutaneousr 
tissueL 
BURNS 
Back 
Adult  percentages  Percentages  in a child 9% (Entire  head 
and Neck) 
18%  (front) 18% Back 
Rule  of nines 
Fig. 8.2.  Classification  of burns 1%' 
18%-18% 
9% 
1%-
13.5%-
Skin and Fasciae  I 173 
1. Melanin,  brown  in colour,  present  in the germinative  zone  of the 
epidermis. 
2. Melanoid,  resembles  melanin,  present  diffusely  throughout  the 
epidermis. 
3. Carotene,  yellow  to orange  in colour,  present  in stratum  corneum 
and the fat cells  of dermis  and superficial  fascia. 
4. Haemoglobin  (purple). 
5. Oxyhaemoglobin  (red),  present  in the cutaneous  vessels. 
The amounts  of first  three  pigments  vary  with  the race,  age,  and 
sart of the body.  In white  races,  the colour  of the skin  depends  chiefly 
an the vascularity  of the dermis  and  thickness  (translucency)  of the 
ceratin.  The  colour  is red where  keratin  is thin  (lips),  and it is white 
where  keratin  is thick  (palms  and soles). 
rhickness 
The thickness  of the skin  varies  from  about  0.5 to 3 mm. 
Structure  of Skin 
The skin  is composed  of two distinct  layers,  epidermis  and dermis. 
A. Epidermis 
It is the superficial,  avascular  layer  of stratified  squamous  epithelium. 
It is ectodermal  in origin  and gives  rise to the appendages  of the skin, 
namely  hair,  nails,  sweat  glands  and sebaceous  glands. 
Structurally,  the epidermis  is made  up of a superficial  cornifiedzone 
and a deep  germinative  zone.  The  cells  of the deepest  layer  proliferate 
and pass  towards  the surface  to replace  the cornified  cells  lost due to 
wear  and tear.  As the cells  migrate  superficially,  they  become  more 
and more  flattened,  and lose  their  nuclei  to form  the flattened  dead 
cells of the stratum  corneum.  In the germinative  zone,  there  are also 
'dopa'  positive  melanocytes  (melanoblasts,  dendritic  cells,  or clear  cells) 
of neural  crest  origin,  which  synthesize  melanin. 
B. Dermis  or corium 
Dermis  or corium  is the deep,  vascular  layer  of the skin,  derived  from 
mesoderm. 
174 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
It is made  up of connective  tissue  (with  variable  elastic  fibres)  mixed 
with blood  vessels,  lymphatics  and  nerves.  The  connective  tissue  is 
arranged  into  a superficial  papillary  layer  and  a deep  reticular  layer. 
The papillary  layer  forms  conical,  blunt  projections  (dermal  papillae) 
which  fit into  reciprocal  depressions  on the undersurface  of the 
epidermis.  The  reticular  layer  is composed  chiefly  of the white  fibrous 
tissue  arranged  mostly  in parallel  bundles. 
The direction  of the bundles,  constituting  flexor  or cleavage  lines 
(Langer's  lines),  is longitudinal  in the limbs  and horizontal  in the trunk 
and neck  (Fig.  8.3). 
Fig. 8.3.  Flexure  lines  (Langer's  lines) 
In old age the elastic  fibres  atrophy  and the skin  becomes  wrinkled. 
Overstretching  of the skin  may  lead  to rupture  of the fibres,  followed 
by scar  formation.  These  scars  appear  as white  streaks  on the skin 
(e.g. lineae  gravidarum). 
At the flexure  lines  of the joints,  the skin  is firmly  adherent  to the 
underlying  deep  fascia.  Dermis  is the real skin,  because,  when  dried  it 
makes  green  hide,  and when  tanned  it makes  leather.  Its deep  surface 
is continuous  with  the superficial  fascia. 
Surface  Irregularities  of the Skin 
The skin  is marked  by three  types  of surface  irregularities,  the tension 
lines,  flexure  lines  and papillary  ridges  (Montagna  and Lobitz,  1964). 
Skin and  Fasciae  I 175 
1. Tension  lines:  Form  a network  of linear  furrows  which  divide 
the surface  into  polygonal  or lozenge-shaped  areas.  These  lines 
to some  extent  correspond  to variations  in the pattern  of fibres  in 
the dermis. 
2. Flexure  lines  (skin  creases  or skin  joints):  Are  certain 
permanent  lines  along  which  the skin  folds  during  habitual 
movements  (chiefly  flexion)  of the joints. 
The skin  along  these  lines  is thin  and firmly  bound  to the deep 
fascia. 
The lines  are prominent  opposite  the flexure  of the joints, 
particularly  on the palms,  soles  and digits  (Fig.  8.4). 
3. Papillary  ridges  (friction  ridges):  Are  confined  to palms  and 
soles  and their  digits. 
They  form  narrow  ridges  separated  by fine  parallel  grooves, 
arranged  in curved  arrays. 
They  correspond  to patterns  of dermal  papillae.  Their  study 
constitutes  a branch  of science,  called  dermatoglyphics  (Cummins 
and Midlo,  1961). 
Three  major  patterns  in the human  fingerprints  include  loops, 
whorls  and arches. 
These  patterns  and  many  other  minor  features  are determined 
genetically  by multifactorial  inheritance  (Fig.  8.5). Fig. 8.4:  Flexure  lines 
Fig. 8.5.  Close  up of a finger  tip showing  characteristic  ridges  that 
form  a fingerprint  pattern  unique  for every  individual 
APPENDAGES  OF SKIN 
1. Nails 
Synonyms,  (a) Onych  or onycho  (G);  and  (b) ungues  (L).  Compare 
with the terms  paronychia,  koilonychia  and onychomycosis  (Fig.  8.6). 
Nails  are hardened  keratin  plates  (cornified  zone)  on the dorsal 
surface  of the tips of fingers  and toes,  acting  as a rigid  support  for the 
digital  pads  of terminal  phalanges.  Each  nail has the following  parts. 
(a) Root  is the proximal  hidden  part  which  is burried  into  the nail 
groove  and is overlapped  by the nail fold  of the skin. 
(b) Free  border  is the distal  part  free  from  the skin. 
(c) Body  is the exposed  part  of the nail  which  is adherent  to the 
underlying  skin. 
The proximal  part  of the body  presents  a white  opaque  crescent 
called  lunule. 
Fig. 8.6:  Parts  of a nail Fingernail  Cuticle  Nail  root 
Nail bed  /  /  / 
Bone 176 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Skin and  Fasciae  I 177 
Each  lateral  border  of the nail body  is overlapped  by a fold  of a skin, 
termed  the nail  wall. 
The skin  (germinative  zone  + corium)  beneath  the root  and body  of 
the nail is called  nail bed.  The germinative  zone  of the nail bed beneath 
the root  and lunule  is thick  and proliferative  (germinal  matrix),  and is 
responsible  for the growth  of the nail. 
The rest of the nail bed is thin (sterile  matrix)  over  which  the growing 
nail glides. 
Under  the translucent  body  (except  lunule)  of the nail,  the corium  is 
very vascular.  This  accounts  for their  pink  colour. 
CLINICAL  ANATOMY 
• In anaemia  the nails  are pale  and white. 
• In iron  deficiency  anaemia  the nails  become  thin,  brittle  and spoon-
shaped  (koilonychia). 
• Hypertrophy  of the nail bed (clubbing)  occurs  in chronic  suppurative 
disease  (lung  abscess,  bronchiectasis,  osteomyelitis)  and in severe 
type of cyanosis  (Fallot's  tetralogy,  chronic  congestive  cardiac 
failure). 
• Disturbances  of nail growth  due to acute  illness  or trauma  give  rise 
to transverse  grooves  in the nail  substance,  which  move  distally 
with the nail  growth.  Since  the average  rate  of growth  is about 
0.1 mm  per day or 3 mm per month,  the date  of the past  illness  can 
be estimated. 
•It takes  about  90-120  days  for the whole  nail  (body)  to grow. 
Therefore,  in fungal  diseases  of the nails  the course  of treatment 
should  last for not less than  this period.  The growth  is faster  in summer 
than in winter,  in the fingers  than  in toes,  and in the longer  fingers 
than in the shorter  ones. 
• Hairs  exhibit  alterations  in certain  diseases.  In malnutrition  hairs 
become  thin,  dry and sparse;  in hypothyroidism  they  become  coarse 
and dry. 
• Excessive  growth  of hair  (hirsutism)  occurs  in adrenogenital 
syndrome.  Loss  of hair  is known  as alopecia. 
• Skin  is dry in 'Dhatura'  poisoning,  heat  stroke,  and diabetic  coma;  it 
is unusually  moist  in hypoglycaemic  coma,  and peripheral  failure. 
178 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
• In ichthyosis  (characterized  by abnormally  dry skin),  the sebaceous 
glands  are few  and small,  and the secretion  of sebum  is markedly 
reduced.  Excessive  oiliness  of skin,  due to overactivity  of sebaceous 
glands,  is called  seborrhoea.  It may  occur  from  puberty  onwards, 
but diminishes  with  advancing  age. 
• Acne  vulgaris  is a common  complication  of seborrhoea.  Seborrhoeic 
skin is susceptible  to infections  (seborrhoeic  dermatitis  or 
furunculosis)  and  to chemical  irritants  (chemical  folliculitis  and 
dermatitis). 
2. Hair 
Hair are keratinous  filaments  derived  from  invaginations  of the 
germinative  layer  of epidermis  into  the dermis. 
These  are peculiar  to mammals  (like  feathers  to the birds),  and help 
in conservation  of their  body  heat. 
However,  in man  the heat  loss is prevented  by the cutaneous  sensation 
of touch. 
Hair are distributed  all over  the body,  except  for the palms,  soles, 
dorsal  surface  of distal  phalanges,  umbilicus,  glans  penis,  inner  surface 
of prepuce,  the labia  minora,  and  inner  surface  of labia  majora.  The 
length,  thickness  and  colour  of the hair  vary  in different  part  of the 
body  and in different  individuals. 
Each  hair  has an implanted  part  called  the root,  and  a projecting 
part called  the shaft. 
The root  is surrounded  by a hair  follicle  (a sheath  of epidermis  and 
dermis),  and is expanded  at its proximal  end to form  the hair  bulb. 
Each  hair  bulb  is invaginated  at its end by the hair  papilla  (vascular 
connective  tissue)  which  forms  the neurovascular  hilum  of the hair and 
its sheath. 
Hair grows  at the hair bulb,  by proliferation  of its cells  capping  the 
papilla. 
The hair follicles,  enclosing  hair roots,  lie obliquely  to the surface  of 
the skin,  which  is responsible  for the characteristic  hair  streams  in 
different  parts  of the body. 
The arrectores  pilorum  muscles  (smooth  muscles  supplied  by 
sympathetic  nerves)  connect  the undersurface  of the follicles  to the 
superficial  part of the dermis. 
Skin and  Fasciae  I 179 
Contraction  of these  muscles  leads  to erection  of hair,  squeezes  out 
the sebum,  and produces  'goose  skin'  (Fig.  8.1). 
The foetal  skin  is covered  by fine hair  called  lanugo  (primary  hair). 
These  are mostly  shed  by birth,  and  are replaced  during  infancy  by 
another  set of fine  hair  called  vellus  (secondary  hair). 
These  are retained  in most  parts  of the body,  but are replaced  by the 
thick  and  dark  terminal  hair  of the scalp  and  eyebrows,  and  other 
hairy  areas  of the adult  skin. 
The hair  grow  at the rate  of about  1.5-2.2  mm  per week;  their 
growth  is controlled  by hormones. 
The life span  of the hair  varies  from  4 months  (eyelashes,  axillary 
hair)  to 4 years  (scalp  hair). 
3. Sweat  Glands 
Sudoriferous  or sweat  glands  are distributed  all over  the skin,  except 
for the lips,  glans  penis,  and nail  bed.  These  glands  are of two types, 
eccrine  and  apocrine  (Zelickson,  1971). 
The eccrine  glands  are much  more  abundant  and  distributed  in 
almost  every  part  of the skin. 
Each  gland  is a single  tube,  the deep  part  of which  is coiled  into  a 
ball. 
The coiled  part,  called  the body  of the gland,  lies in the deeper  part 
of corium  or in the subcutaneous  tissue. 
The straight  part,  called  the duct,  traverses  the dermis  and epidermis 
and opens  on the surface  of the skin. 
The glands  are large  in the axilla  and groin,  most  numerous  in the 
palms  and soles,  and least  numerous  in the neck  and back. 
The eccrine  glands  are merocrine  in nature,  i.e. produce  their  thin 
watery  secretion  without  any disintegration  of the epithelial  cells. 
They  are supplied  and  controlled  by cholinergic  sympathetic 
nerves. 
The glands  help  in regulation  of the body  temperature  by evaporation 
of sweat,  and also  help  in excreting  the body  salts. 
In dogs,  sweat  glands  are confined  to foot  pads.  Therefore,  dogs  do 
not sweat,  they  pant. 
The apocrine  glands  are confined  to axilla,  eyelids  (Moll's  glands), 
nipple  and areola  of the breast,  perianal  region,  and the external  genitalia. 
180 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
They  are larger  than  eccrine  glands  and produce  a thicker  secretion 
having  a characteristic  odour.  They  develop  in close  association 
with hair  and their  ducts  typically  open  into  the distal  ends  of the hair 
follicles. 
Ceruminous  glands  of the external  auditory  meatus  are modified 
apocrine  sweat  glands. 
The apocrine  glands  also  are merocrine  in nature,  but are regulated 
by a dual  autonomic  control.  Some  workers  are not inclined  to call 
them  as sweat  glands  at all because  they  do not respond  sufficiently  to 
temperature  changes. 
In animals  they  produce  chemical  signals  or pheromones,  which  are 
important  in courtship  and social  behaviour. 
On an average  one  litre  of sweat  is secreted  per  day;  another 
400 ml of water  is lost through  the lungs,  and 100 ml through  the faeces. 
This makes  a total  of about  1500  ml, a rough  estimate  of the invisible 
loss of water  per day. 
However,  in hot climates  the secretion  of sweat  may  amount  to 
3-10  litres  per day,  with  a maximum  of 1-2 litres  per hour. 
So long  the sweat  glands  are intact,  the skin  can regenerate.  If the 
sweat  glands  are lost,  skin  grafting  becomes  necessary. 
4. Sebaceous  Glands 
Sebaceous  glands,  producing  an oily  secretion,  are widely  distributed 
all over  the dermis  of the skin  (Fig.  8.7),  except  for the palms  and 
soles.  They  are especially  abundant  in the scalp  and face,  and are also 
very numerous  around  the apertures  of the ear, nose,  mouth,  and anus. 
Sebaceous  glands  are small  and sacculated  in appearance,  made  up 
of a cluster  of about  2-5 piriform  alveoli. 
Their  ducts  open  into  the hair  follicles,  with  the exception  of lips, 
glans  penis,  inner  surface  of prepuce,  labia  minora,  nipple  and areola  of 
the breast,  and tarsal  glands  of the eyelids,  where  the ducts  open  on the 
surface  of the skin. 
Sebaceous  glands  are holocrine  in nature,  i.e. they  produce  their 
secretion  by complete  fatty  degeneration  of the central  cells  of the 
alveolus,  which  are then  replaced  by the proliferating  peripheral  cells. 
The secretion  is under  hormonal  control,  especially  the androgens. 
The oily  secretion  of sebaceous  glands  is called  sebum. 
Skin and  Fasciae  I 181 
Epidermis 
Hair shaft 
Arrector  pilorum  muscle 
T.S. hair  follicle 
Sebaceous  gland 
Duct  of sweat  gland 
Germinal  matrix 
Acini  of sweat  gland 
Fig. 8.7:  Sebaceous  gland  between  hair  and  arrector  pilorum  muscle 
It lubricates  skin  and protects  it from  moisture,  desiccation,  and the 
harmful  sun rays.  Sebum  also  lubricates  hair  and prevents  them  from 
becoming  brittle. 
In addition,  sebum  also  has some  bactericidal  action. 
Sebum  makes  the skin  water-proof.  Water  evaporates  from  the skin, 
but the fats and oils are absorbed  by it. 
Functions  of Skin 
1. Protection.  Skin  protects  the body  from  mechanical  injuries, 
bacterial  infections,  heat and cold,  wet and drought,  acid  and alkali, 
and the actinic  rays  of the sun. 
2. Sensory.  Skin  is sensory  to touch,  pain  and temperature. 
3. Regulation  of body  temperature.  Heat  is lost through  evaporation 
of sweat;  and heat  is conserved  by the fat and hair. 
4. Absorption.  Oily  substances  are freely  absorbed  by the skin. 
5. Secretion.  Skin  secretes  sweat  and  sebum. 
6. Excretion.  The  excess  of water,  salts  and  waste  products  are 
excreted  through  the sweat. 
7. Regulation  of pH. A good  amount  of acid  is excreted  through 
the sweat. 
8. Synthesis.  In the skin,  vitamin  D is synthesized  from  ergosterol 
by the action  of ultraviolet  rays  of the sun. 
182 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
9. Storage.  Skin  stores  chlorides. 
10. Reparative.  The  cuts  and wounds  of the skin  are quickly  healed 
SUPERFICIAL  FASCIA 
Definition 
Superficial  fascia  is a general  coating  of the body  beneath  the skin, 
made  up of loose  areolar  tissue  with  varying  amounts  of fat. 
Distribution  of Fat in this Fascia 
1. Fat is abundant  in the gluteal  region  (buttocks),  lumbar  region 
(flanks),  front  of the thighs,  anterior  abdominal  wall  below  the 
umbilicus,  mammary  gland  (Fig.  8.8),  postdeltoid  region,  and the 
cervicothoracic  region. 
2. In females,  fat is more  abundant  and is more  evenly  distributed 
than in males. 
3. Fat is absent  from  the eyelids,  external  ear, penis,  and scrotum. 
4. The  subcutaneous  layer  of fat is called  the panniculus  adiposus. 
In females  fat is in the superficial  fascia  of the lower  abdomen, 
upper  thigh,  whereas  in males  it is inside  the abdominal  cavity. 
In general,  in women  fat forms  a thicker  and more  even  layer  than 
in men. 
Fig. 8.8:  Fat  in mammary  gland 
Skin and  Fasciae  I 183 
Fat (adipose  tissue)  fills  the hollow  spaces  like  axilla,  orbits  and 
ischiorectal  fossa. 
Fat present  around  the kidneys  in abdomen,  supports  these  organs. 
types  of Fats 
There  are two  types  of fat, i.e. yellow  and brown  fat. 
Most  of the body  fat is yellow,  only  in hibernating  animals  it is brown. 
The cells  of brown  fat are smaller  with  several  small  droplets,  and 
multiple  mitochondria. 
Fat cells  are specialised  cells,  and  the size  of fat cells  increases 
during  accumulation  of fat, rather  than  the number  of cells. 
Any attempt  to reduce  excessive  fat (obesity)  must  be slow  and 
steady  and not drastic,  as the latter  may  cause  harm  to the body. 
Important  Features 
1. Superficial  fascia  is most  distinct  in the lower  part of the anterior 
abdominal  wall,  perineum,  and the limbs. 
2. It is very  thin  on the dorsal  aspect  of the hands  and feet,  sides  of 
the neck,  face,  and around  the anus. 
3. It is very  dense  in the scalp,  palms,  and soles. 
4. Superficial  fascia  shows  stratification  (into  two  layers)  in the 
lower  part  of anterior  abdominal  wall,  perineum,  and uppermost 
part of the thighs. 
5. It contains: 
(a) Subcutaneous  muscles  in the face,  neck  and scrotum 
(b) Mammary  gland 
(c) Deeply  situated  sweat  glands 
(d) Localized  groups  of lymph  nodes 
(e) Cutaneous  nerves  and vessels. 
:unctions 
1. Superficial  fascia  facilitates  movements  of the skin. 
2. It serves  as a soft  medium  for the passage  of the vessels  and 
nerves  to the skin. 
3. It conserves  body  heat  because  fat is a bad conductor  of heat. 
184 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
DEEP  FASCIA 
Definition 
Deep  fascia  is a fibrous  sheet  which  invests  the body  beneath  the 
superficial  fascia.  It is devoid  of fat, and is usually  inelastic  and tough 
(Fig.  8.9). 
Skin 
Superficial  fascia 
(subcutaneous  tissue) 
Deep  fascia 
Medial 
intermuscular 
septum Brachioradialis 
Lateral 
intermuscular 
septum 
Triceps 
Humerus Biceps 
Brachialis 
Fig. 8.9.  Cross-section  of an arm  showing  the arrangement  of 
superficial  and  deep  fascia. 
Distribution 
1. Deep  fascia  is best  defined  in the limbs  where  it forms  tough 
and tight  sleeves,  and in the neck  where  it forms  a collar. 
2. It is ill-defined  on the trunk  and  face. 
Important  Features 
1. Extensions  (prolongations)  of the deep  fascia  form: 
(a) The  intermuscular  septa  which  divide  the  limb  into 
compartments  (Fig.  8.10). 
(b) The  fibroareolar  sheaths  for the muscles,  vessels  and nerves. 
2. Thickenings  of the deep  fascia  form: 
(a) Retinacula  (retention  bands)  around  certain  joints  like 
(Fig.  8.11)  wrist  and ankle. 
Skin and  Fasciae  I 185 
Flexor  compartment 
Medial 
intermuscular 
septum Transverse 
intermuscular  septum 
Skin 
Deep  fascia 
Anteroposterior  septum 
Lateral  intermuscular 
septum 
Extensor  compartment 
Fig. 8.10:  Intermuscular  septa  forming  compartments 
Palmar  cutaneous 
branch  of ulnar  nerve 
Volar  carpal  ligament 
Ulnar  artery 
and nerve 
Hypothenar 
muscles 
Flexor 
retinaculum 
Flexor 
digitorum 
superficialis 
Ulnar  bursa Flexor  carpi  radialis 
Flexor  pollicis 
longus 
Flexor  digitorum 
profundus Palmaris  longus 
Palmar  cutaneous 
branch  of median  nerve 
Median  nerve 
Thenar  muscles 
Fig. 8.11:  Flexor  reticulum  at the wrist 
(b) The  palmar  and plantar  aponeuroses  for protection  of nerves 
and blood  vessels. 
3. Interruptions  in the deep  fascia  on the subcutaneous  bones. 
Deep  fascia  never  crosses  a subcutaneous  bone.  Instead  it blends 
with its periosteum  and is bound  down  to the bone. 
Modifications  of deep  fascia 
1. Forms  the intermuscular  septa  separating  functionally  different 
group  of muscles  into  separate  compartments  (Fig.  8.10). 
2. Covers  each  muscle  as epimysium  which  sends  in the septa  to 
enclose  each  muscle  fasciculus  known  as perimysium.  From  the 
perimysium  septa  pass  to enclose  each  muscle  fibre.  These  fine 
186 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
septa  are the endomysium.  Through  all these  connective  tissue 
septa,  e.g. epimysium,  perimysium  and endomysium,  arterioles, 
capillaries,  venules,  lymphatics  and nerves  traverse  to reach  each 
muscle  fibre  (Fig.  4.6). 
3. Deep  fascia  covers  each  nerve  as epineurium,  each  nerve  fascicle 
as perineurium  and  individual  nerve  fibre  as endoneurium.  These 
connective  tissue  coverings  support  the nerve  fibres  and carry 
capillaries  and lymphatics  (Fig.  7.10). 
4. Forms  sheaths  around  large  arteries,  e.g.,  carotid  sheath, 
axillary  sheath.  The  deep  fascia  is dense  around  the artery  and 
rather  loose  around  the vein  to give  an allowance  for the vein  to 
distend  (Fig.  8.12). 
(a) Internal  carotid  artery 
External  carotid  artery 
Ansa  cervicalis 
Common  carotid  artery 
/ 
Internal  jugular  vein—t-f 
\ 
Vagus  nerve  ——— 
Sympathetic  trunk  — -—O  (b) 
Fig. 8.12:  Carotid  sheath:  (a) Longitudinal  section,  (b)  transverse  section 
5. Modified  to form  the capsule,  synovial  membrane  and bursae  in 
relation  to the joints. 
6. Forms  tendon  sheaths  wherever  tendons  cross  over  a joint.  This 
mechanism  prevents  wear  and tear of the tendon  (Fig.  8.13). 
7. In the region  of palm  and sole  it is modified  to form  aponeuroses, 
e.g. palmar  and plantar  aponeuroses  which  afford  protection  to 
the underlying-structures  (Fig.  8.14).  It also forms  septa  between 
various  muscles.  These  septa  are specially  well  developed  in the 
Skin and  Fasciae  I 187 
calf muscles  of lower  limb.  The contraction  of calf muscles  in the 
tight  sleeve  of deep  fascia  helps  in pushing  the venous  blood  and 
lymph  towards  the heart. 
Thus  the deep  fascia  helps  in venous  and lymphatic  return  from 
the lower  limb  (Fig.  8.15). 
Flexor  retinaculum 
Ulnar  bursa Radial  bursa 
Digital  synovial 
sheaths 
Fig. 8.13:  Tendon  sheaths  or bursae  in the  palm 
Calcaneus 
Thick  central  part  and 
Thin medial  and  lateral  parts  of 
plantar  aponeurosis 
Fibrous  flexor  sheath 
Sheath  partially  and  completely  removed 
to expose  flexor  tendons 
Fig. 8.14:  Plantar  aponeurosis 
188 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Fig. 8.15:  Transverse  section  through  leg  showing  three  compartments. 
Posterior  compartment  is subdivided  into  three  regions  by two  fascial  septa 
8. In the forearm  and leg,  the deep  fascia  is modified  to form  the 
interosseous  membrane,  which  keeps: 
(a) The  two bones  at optimum  distance. 
(b) Increases  surface  area  for attachment  of muscles  (Fig.  8.16) 
(c) Transmits  weight  from  one bone  to other. Posterior  compartment Anterior  compartment 
Interosseous  membrane 
Deep  fascia 
Anterior  intermuscular  septum 
Lateral  compartment 
Fibula 
Posterior  intermuscular  septum 
Tibialis  posterior 
Long  flexors  of toes 
Deep  and  superficial  transverse 
fascial  septum 
Superficial  muscles  of calf 
Fig. 8.16:  Interosseous  membrane  of the  forearm — Radial  notch  of ulna 
— Fossa  below  superior 
radioulnar  joint 
Interosseous  membrane 
Head  of ulna Head  of radius 
Ulnar  notch 
of radius 
Articular  disc  of inferior 
radioulnar  joint Tibia 
Skin and  Fasciae  I 189 
Functions 
1. Deep  fascia  keeps  the underlying  structures  in position  and 
preserves  the characteristic  surface  contour  of the limbs  and neck. 
2. It provides  extra  surface  for muscular  attachments. 
3. It helps  in venous  and lymphatic  return. 
4. It assists  muscles  in their  action  by the degree  of tension  and 
pressure  it exerts  upon  their  surfaces. 
5. The  retinacula  act as pulleys  and  serve  to prevent  the loss  of 
power.  In such  situations  the friction  is minimized  by the synovial 
sheaths  of the tendons. 
CLINICAL  ANATOMY 
Skin is the outer  garment  of the body  and  is subjected  to following 
maladies. 
•Dermatitis  or eczema:  There  is redness,  swelling,  itching  and 
exudation  in acute  cases.  It usually  becomes  chronic.  Dermatitis 
may be allergic  due to soaps  and cosmetics. 
• Albinism:  There  is no melanin  pigment.  It is usually  an inherited 
condition. 
• Herpes  zoster  virus:  This  virus  causes  vesicular  lesion  around 
the nasal  and oral orifices  and along  a dermatome.  It is also responsible 
for causing  chicken  pox (Fig.  7.26). 
• Pressure  sores:  The  skin  slowly  dies  over  the pressure  sites,  e.g. 
pressure  sores  in the lower  back  when  patient  lies on the back  for 
prolonged  periods  due to illness  (Fig.  7.23). 
• Burns:  It is a condition  which  occurs  due to too much  heat  or cold 
acids,  alkalies  and electricity,  etc. If only  epidermis  is affected,  the 
burn is called  superficial.  If both  dermis  and epidermis  are affected 
the burn  is called  deep.  Burn  results  in dehydration,  shock  and 
contractures. 
• Benign  pigmented  naevus  or mole:  Melanin  pigment  cells  are 
found  in small  numbers  in the  basal  layer  of skin.  These 
neuroectodermal  cells  may  proliferate  at the dermoepidermal  junction, 
in the dermis,  to form  naevi  of different  sizes  and forms. 
• Colour:  Skin  is pale  in anaemia,  yellow  in jaundice  and  blue  in 
cyanosis. 
190 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
•Boil  (furuncle):  Boil  is an infection  and  suppuration  of the hair 
follicle  and the sebaceous  gland. 
• Skin  incisions:  These  should  be made  parallel  to the lines  of 
cleavage.  This  will result  in small  scars  (Fig.  8.3). 
• Sebaceous  cyst  is common  in the scalp.  It is due to obstruction  of 
the duct  of a sebaceous  gland,  caused  either  by trauma  or infection 
(Fig.  8.17).  If the duct  of sebaceous  gland  of cheek  is blocked,  it 
leads  to closed  comedones  or acne  (Fig.  8.18).  If the condition  gets 
severe,  the condition  is acne  vulgaris  (Fig.  8.19). 
• Scabies  is a mite  infection.  It is commonly  seen  in genital  region 
(Fig.  8.20)  and in interdigital  cleft  (Fig.  8.21). 
Fig. 8.17:  Sebaceous  cysts  on the scalp 
Fig. 8.18:  Comedones  or acne  on the cheek 
Skin and  Fasciae  I 191 
Fig.  8.21:  Scabies  in interdigital  cleft Fig. 8.19:  Acne  vulgaris 
Fig. 8.20:  Scabies  in genital  region 
192 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
• Keloid  is overgrowth  of connective  tissue  at site of injury  or burn 
(Fig.  8.22). 
• Fungal  infection  of nail  is common  (Fig.  8.23).  It may  occur  in 
between  the toes  also. 
Fig. 8.22:  Keloid  after  burns 
Fig. 8.23:  Fungal  infection  of the nail 
• Vitiligo  is an autoimmune  disease  leading  to white  patches  on skin 
(Fig.  8.24). 
• Baldness  is related  to hormones.  Alopecia  areata  (Fig.  8.25)  is an 
autoimmune  disease. 
• Deep  fascia  of the leg helps  in venous  return  from  the legs.  The 
muscular  contractions  press  on the deep  veins  and form  an effective 
mechanism  of venous  return.  This  contraction  becomes  more 
effective  within  the tight  sleeve  of deep  fascia. 
Fig. 8.24:  Vitiligo  on the skin  of hands 
Fig. 8.25:  Alopecia  areata 
• Planes:  The  deep  fascia  forms  planes  and  the fluid  or pus tracks 
along  these  fascial  planes.  The  tubercular  abscess  of the cervical 
vertebrae  passes  along  the prevertebral  fascia  into  the posterior 
triangle  of neck  or into the axilla. 
• Retinacula  keep  the tendons  and nerves  in position.  Sometimes  the 
delicate  nerve  may  get compressed  as it traverses  under  the 
retinacula.  Median  nerve  may  get compressed  deep  to the flexor 
retinaculum,  leading  to the Carpal  tunnel  syndrome  (Fig.  8.11). 
•Similarly  tibial  nerve  may  get  compressed  under  the  flexor 
retinaculum  of leg leading  to Tarsal  tunnel  syndrome. 
(Figures  8.18  to 8 25 have  kindly  been  provided  by Dr Anuradha  and  Dr. Praveen  Aggarwal  of 
Aggarwal  Medical  Centre,  Naveen  Shahdara,  Delhi) Skin and  Fasciae  > 193 
9 Connective  Tissue, 
Ligaments  and Raphe 
CONNECTIVE  TISSUE 
Introduction 
Connective  tissue  is a widely  distributed  general  type  of tissue  which 
supports,  binds  and protects  the special  (well  differentiated)  tissues  of 
the body. 
It has both  the cellular  and extracellular  components. 
The cellular  component  of connective  tissue  plays  the role  of active 
defence,  whereas  the extracellular  component  (fibres  and  ground 
substance)  serves  a number  of mechanical  functions  of support  and 
protection  against  the mechanical  stresses  and strains. 
The ordinary  type  of connective  tissue  is distributed  all over  the 
body,  but the special  type  of connective  tissue  forms  certain  well 
differentiated  tissues,  like the bone  and cartilage. 
A number  of cell types  of the connective  tissue  are also  found  in the 
blood  and lymph. 
The greater  part  of connective  tissue  develops  from  embryonic 
mesoderm. 
The cells  of the connective  tissue  are widely  separated  by the 
abundance  of extracellular  matrix. 
CONSTITUENT  ELEMENTS 
Connective  tissue  is made  up of cells  and extracellular  matrix. 
A. Cells 
Cells  are fibroblast,  macrophage,  plasma  cell,  mast  cell,  fat cell,  and 
pigment  cell. 
196 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
B. Extracellular  Matrix 
The matrix  has a fibrous  and a non-fibrous  element.  The fibrous  element 
has three  types  of fibres  — collagen,  elastin  and  reticulin.  The  non-
fibrous  element  is formed  by the ground  substance. 
TYPES  OF CONNECTIVE  TISSUE 
Different  types  of connective  tissue  are found  in different  parts  of the 
body  according  to the local  functional  requirements.  These  types  are 
based  on predominance  of the cell type,  concentration  and arrangement 
of the fibre  type,  and character  of ground  substance.  The  connective 
tissues  are classified  as follows. 
I. Loose  Connective  Tissue 
Its types  are:  Areolar  tissue,  adipose  tissue,  myxomatous  tissue  and 
reticular  tissue.  These  are described  in Garg,  Kaul,  Bahl:  A Textbook 
of Histology—A  Colour  Atlas  and  Text,  4 edn,  CBS  Publishers  & 
Distributors,  New  Delhi. 
II. Dense  Irregular  Connective  Tissue 
1. Ordinary  - tendon 
2. Specialised  - cartilage  and bone  which  have  been  described  in 
Chapter  2. 
Functions  of Connective  Tissue 
1. As a packing  material,  connective  tissue  provides  a supporting 
matrix  for many  highly  organized  structures. 
2. It forms  restraining  mechanism  of the body  in the form  of 
retinacula,  check  ligaments  (Fig.  9.1) and fibrous  pulley  (Fig.  9.2). 
3. The  ensheathing  layer  of deep  fascia  preserves  the characteristic 
contour  of the limbs  and aids circulation  in the veins  and lymphatics 
(Fig.  5.8). 
4. It provides  surface  coating  of the body  in the form  of superficial 
fascia  which  stores  fat and conserves  body  heat. 
5. It provides  additional  surface  for the attachment  of muscles  in 
the form  of deep  fascia,  intermuscular  septa  and  interosseous 
membranes  (Figs  8.15,8.16). 
Connective  Tissue,  Ligaments  and  Raphe  197 
Lateral  palpebral  raphe 
Lateral  check  ligament 
Zygomatic  bone 
Sheath  of lateral  rectus 
Orbital  fascia 
Fig. 9.1:  Check  ligaments  in the orbit 
Fig. 9.2:  Fibrous  pulley  to change  the direction  of muscle 
6. It forms  fascial  planes  which  provide  convenient  pathways  for 
vessels  (blood  vessels  and lymphatics)  and nerves. 
7. In places  where  it is loose  in texture  (loose  connective  tissue)  it 
facilitates  movements  between  the adjacent  structures,  and  by 
forming  bursal  sacs  it minimizes  friction  and pressure  effects 
(Fig.  8.13). 
8. Connective  tissue  helps  in the repair  of injuries  whereby  the 
fibroblasts  lay down  collagen  fibres  to form  the scar  tissue. Lacrimal  sac Medial  palpebral  ligament 
Lacrimal  fascia 
Lacrimal  bone 
Medial  check  ligament 
Sheath  of medial  rectus 
Orbital  fascia 
Ethmoid  bone 
Body  of sphenoid 
Sheath  of optic  nerve 
Superior  rectus-
.ateral  rectus 
Inferior  oblique Superior  oblique  -
Pulley 
-Medial  rectus 
-Inferior  rectus 
198 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
9. The  macrophages  of connective  tissue  serve  a defensive  function 
against  the bacterial  invasion  by their  phagocytic  activity.  They 
also act as scavengers  in removing  the cell  debris  and  foreign 
material. 
The plasma  cells  are capable  of producing  antibodies  against 
specific  antigens  (foreign  proteins). 
The mast  cells,  by producing  histamine  and  serotonin,  are 
responsible  for  the  various  inflammatory,  allergic  and 
hypersensitivity  reactions.  Pigment  cells  protect  the skin  against 
ultraviolet  radiation,  so that the inflammatory  changes  typical  of 
sunburn  do not occur,  and the chromosomal  damage  in the dividing 
cells  of epidermis  is avoided. 
10. Connective  tissue  contains  mesenchymal  cells  of embryonic  type. 
These  are capable  of transformation  into  each  type  of the 
connective  tissue  cells  with  their  discrete  functions. 
LIGAMENTS 
Definition 
Ligaments  are fibrous  bands  which  connect  the adjacent  bones,  forming 
integral  parts  of the joints.  They  are tough  and unyielding,  but at the 
same  time  are flexible  and pliant,  so that  the normal  movements  can 
occur  without  any  resistance,  but  the abnormal  movements  are 
prevented. 
Types  of Ligaments 
A. According  to their  composition 
1. Most  of the ligaments  are made  up of collagen  fibres.  These 
are inelastic  and unstretchable  (Fig.  9.3). 
2. A few  ligaments,  like  the ligamenta  flava  and ligaments  of 
auditory  ossicles,  are made  up of elastin  fibres  (predominantly). 
These  are elastic  and stretchable  (Fig.  9.4). 
B. According  to their  relation  to the joint 
1. Intrinsic  ligaments  surround  the joint,  and may  be extracapsular 
or intracapsular. 
2. Extrinsic  ligaments  are independent  of the joint;  and lie away 
from  it (Fig.  9.5). 
Connective  Tissue,  Ligaments  and  Raphe  199 
Fig. 9.3:  Collagenous,  deltoid  ligament 
Tegmen  tympani  —— 
Aditus 
Posterior 
canaliculus  for 
chorda  tympani 
Chorda  tympani 
Tympanic 
membrane 
Handle  of malleus Head  of malleus 
Anterior  ligament  of 
malleus  and 
petrotympanic  fissure 
Tensor  tympani 
muscle  within 
canal 
Anterior 
Bony  septum 
Auditory  tube 
Anterior  canaliculus 
for chorda  tympani 
Fig. 9.4:  Elastin,  anterior  ligament  of malleus 
Morphology 
Ligaments  are usually  considered  as degenerated  tendons  of the related 
muscles. 
1. Tibial  collateral  ligament  is degenerated  tendon  of adductor 
magnus  muscle. - Medial  malleolus 
- Talus 
- Posterior  tibiotalar  ligament' 
- Tibiocalcanean  ligament 
• Tibionavicular  ligament 
Calcaneum 
Sustentaculum  tali 
\ Spring  ligament 
Navicular  bone 
Parts  of deltoid 
ligament 
200 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Fibular  collateral 
ligament  (extrinsic) 
f Tibial  collateral 
Tibia  ligament  (extrinsic) Femur 
Cruciate  ligaments 
(intrinsic) 
Fig. 9.5:  Some  of the extrinsic  and  intrinsic  ligaments  of knee  joint 
2. Sacrotuberous  ligament  is degenerated  tendon  of long  head  of 
biceps  femoris. 
3. Sacrospinous  ligament  is degenerated  part  of coccygeus  muscle. 
4. Long  plantar  ligament  is part of peroneus  longus. 
Their  tendinous  nature  is evident  in some  animal  ancestors. 
Blood  and  Nerve  Supply 
The blood  vessels  and nerves  of the joint  ramify  on its ligaments  and 
supply  them. 
Most  ligaments  serve  as sense  organs  because  of their  rich  nerve 
supply.  They  act as important  reflex  mechanisms  and are important  in 
monitoring  the position  and movements  of the joint. 
Functions 
1. Ligaments  are important  agents  in maintaining  the stability  at the 
joint. 
2. Their  sensory  function  makes  them  important  reflex  organs,  so 
that their  joint  stabilizing  role is far more  efficient. 
Connective  Tissue,  Ligaments  and  Raphe  201 
RAPHE 
A raphe  is a linear  fibrous  band  formed  by interdigitation  of the tendinous 
or aponeurotic  ends  of the muscles.  It differs  from  a ligament  in that it 
is stretchable. 
Examples:  linea  alba,  pterygomandibular  raphe,  mylohyoid  raphe, 
median  pharyngeal  raphe  (Fig.  9.6),  anococcygeal  raphe,  etc. 
Styloid  process 
Stylopharyngeus 
Stylohyoid  ligament 
Median  pharyngeal  raphe Middle  constrictor 
Oesophagus Basisphenoid 
Pharyngeal  tubercle 
Pharyngobasilar  fascia 
Superior  constrictor 
Thyropharyngeal  and 
cricopharyngeal  part  of 
inferior  constrictor 
Fig. 9.6 
CLINICAL  ANATOMY  OF CONNECTIVE  TISSUE 
•Collagen  diseases  include  rheumatic  fever,  rheumatoid 
arthritis,  disseminated  lupus  erythematosus,  scleroderma, 
dermatomyositis,  polyarteritis  nodosa,  and  serum  sickness.  These 
are the diseases  of connective  tissue  characterized  by its fibrinoid 
necrosis. 
• Scleroderma  is a slowly  progressive  rheumatic  disease  accompanied 
by vascular  lesions,  especially  in the skin,  lungs  and kidneys.  It is 
characterized  by deposition  of fibrous  tissue  in the skin.  This  leads 
to thickness  and firmness  of the affected  areas.  It is a autoimmune 
disease  of connective  tissue. 
202 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
•Dupuytren's  contracture:  Occurs  due  to contraction  of fibrous 
tissue  of palmar  aponeurosis.  The disease  results  in flexion  deformities 
of fingers,  especially  ring  finger  and little  finger  (Fig.  9.7). 
• Inflammations  (fibrositis)  and  injuries  (pulls  and  sprains)  of the 
connective  tissue  are very  painful  because  of its rich  nerve  suppl} 
or the associated  muscle  spasm.  Relief  (healing)  of pain  in these 
disorders  is markedly  delayed  due  to poor  blood  supply  of the 
connective  tissue. 
• Marfan's  syndrome  is a hereditary  disease  causing  mesodermal 
and ectodermal  dysplasia.  It is characterized  by excessive  height, 
arachnodactyly,  high  arched  palate,  dislocated  eye  lenses,  and 
congenital  heart  disease. 
• Tendons  at the back  of wrist  are enveloped  by synovial  sheath.  Al 
times  the sheath  may  form  a swelling  at back  of wrist.  This  is called 
the "simple  ganglion"  (Fig.  9.8). Fig. 9.7:  Dupuytren's  contracture 
Fiq. 9.8:  Ganglion  at the back  of wrist 
Connective  Tissue,  Ligaments  and  Raphe  203 
Ganglion  is a cystic  swelling  resulting  from  mucoid  degeneration  of 
synovial  sheaths  around  the tendons. 
CLINICAL  ANATOMY  OF LIGAMENTS 
• Undue  stretching  and tearing  of the fibres  of a ligament  due  to an 
injury  is known  as 'sprain'.  It causes  severe  pain  and effusion  into 
the ligament  and joint.  The  bones  are normal  as seen  in the X-ray 
film. 
• The  joint  stability  is lost in the neuropathic  joints,  as occurs  in tabes 
dorsalis,  syringomyelia,  leprosy,  etc. 
204 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Dens 
Atlas  condyle 
Dens  of axis,  seen  through  the open  mouth Frontal  air sinuses 
« 
X-ray Nasal  septum 
Zygomatic  bone 
Maxillary  air sinus 
skull  showing  frontal  and  maxillary  air sinuses Upper  jaw 
Lower  jaw 
10 Principles  of 
Radiography 
X-ray  are a kind  of electromagnetic  waves  which  are used  extensively 
in medicine  for both  diagnostic  and therapeutic  purposes. 
All electromagnetic  waves  (X-rays,  ultraviolet  rays,  infrared  rays 
and radio  waves)  are produced  by acceleration  of electrons. 
HISTORICAL 
X-rays  were  discovered  accidentally  on November  8,1895,  by Wilhelm 
Konrad  Roentgen. 
Roentgen  was a German  physicist  from  the University  of Wurzburg. 
He was  engaged  in studying  the behaviour  of an electron  beam  when 
passed  through  a vacuum  to strike  a tungsten  plate.  To his surprise,  he 
observed  that,  in addition  to electrons,  certain  unknown  rays  were  also 
produced,  which  could  pass  through  the glass  envelope  of his apparatus 
and caused  a glow  on a distant  fluorescent  screen.  He was  able  to 
photograph  the  bones  of his hand  by placing  the hand  over  a 
photographic  plate  and  then  shining  the rays  on it. For his unique 
discovery,  Roentgen  was  awarded  the first  Nobel  Prize  in Physics  in 
The discovery  of X-rays  provided  a new  dimension  to the 
advancement  of medical  and other  sciences. 
The medical  uses  of X-rays  are both  diagnostic  and therapeutic. 
As a diagnostic  tool,  radiography  has  proved  of great  value  in 
detection  of the early  stages  of deep-seated  diseases,  when  the 
possibility  of cure  is greatest. 
Therapeutically,  X-rays  (radiotherapy)  are used  in the treatment  of 
cancer  (selected  cases)  because,  the rays  can  destroy  cancer  cells 
much  more  easily  without  destroying  the adjacent  normal  cells. 1901. 
205 
206 ! Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
PROPERTIES  OF X-RAYS 
The relevant  properties  of X-rays  are as follows. 
1. Penetrating  Power 
X-rays  form  a part of the spectrum  of electromagnetic  radiation.  They 
closely  resemble  the visible  lightrays  in having  a similar  photographic 
effect.  But they  differ  from  the lightrays  in being  invisible  and in having 
a shorter  wavelength.  The  wavelength  of X-rays  is 1/10,000  of that of 
the light  rays,  i.e. 7.5 x 10" 6 - 1.71  x 10 9 cm.  It is this property  of 
shorter  wavelength  which  gives  them  the power  of penetration  of 
different  materials. 
When  X-rays  pass  through  the matter,  the rays  are absorbed  to varying 
extents.  The degree  of absorption  depends  on the density  (atomic  weight) 
of the matter.  Radiography  is based  on the differential  absorption  of 
the X-rays.  Dense  tissues,  like the bone,  absorb  X-rays  far more  readily 
than do the soft  tissues  of the body.  Structures  which  are easily 
penetrated  by the X-rays  are described  as radiolucent,  and  the 
structures  which  are penetrated  with  difficulty  or are not penetrated  at 
all are described  as radiopaque. 
The various  structures  can  be arranged  in a scale  of increasing 
radiopacity. 
(a) Air,  in the respiratory  passages,  stomach  and intestines. 
(b) Fat. 
(c) Soft  tissues,  e.g. muscles,  vessels,  nerves,  and viscera. 
(d) Bones,  due to their  calcium  content. 
(e) Enamel  of teeth,  and 
(f) Dense  foreign  bodies,  e.g.  metallic  fillings  in the teeth,  and 
radiopaque  contrast  media. 
2. Photographic  Effect 
When  X-rays  strike  a photosensitive  film,  the film  gets  photosensitized. 
When  such  a film  is developed  and  fixed  chemically,  a radiography 
image  is obtained. 
X-ray  film  is made  up of cellulose  acetate,  which  is coated  on its 
both sides  with  silver  bromide  (photosensitive)  emulsion  0.001  inch  thick. 
The film  is blue  tinted  and transparent. 
Principles  of Radiography : 207 
An X-ray  image  (picture)  is called  skiagram  (skia  = shadow), 
radiograph,  or roentgenogram.  Radiolucent  structures  produce  black 
shadows  and the radiopaque  structures  produce  white  shadows  in the 
usual  negative  film.  It is useful  to remember  that  gas shadows  are 
black  shadows  and bone  shadows  are the white  shadows. 
3. Fluorescent  Effect 
When  X-rays  strike  certain  metallic  salts  (phosphorous,  zinc,  cadmium, 
sulphide),  the rays  cause  them  to fluoresce,  that  is, light  rays  are 
produced.  This  property  of X-rays  is utilized  in fluoroscopy. 
4. Biological  Effect 
X-rays  can destroy  abnormal  cells  (e.g.  malignant  cells)  much  more 
easily  than  the adjacent  normal  cells.  This  property  of X-rays  is utilized 
in the treatment  of various  cancers. 
However,  X-rays  are potentially  dangerous.  On repeated  exposures, 
they can cause  burns,  tumours,  and even  mutations.  Therefore,  adequate 
protective  measures  must  be taken  against  repeated  exposures  to 
X-rays. 
RADIOGRAPHIC  VIEWS 
Radiographs  of a part taken  in more  than  one view  give  a more  complete 
information  about  the entire  structure  by eliminating  some  particular 
overlapping  shadows  in particular  views. 
The 'view'  expresses  the direction  of flow  of the X-rays.  In AP 
(anteroposterior)  view  the rays  pass  from  the anterior  to the posterior 
surface,  and  the posterior  surface  faces  the X-ray  plate.  In PA 
(posteroanterior)  view  the X-rays  pass  from  the posterior  to the 
anterior  surface,  and the anterior  surface  faces  the X-ray  plate.  The 
part of the body  facing  the X-ray  plate  (i.e.  near  the X-ray  plate)  casts 
a sharper  shadow  than  the part  facing  the X-ray  tube. 
The chest  skiagrams  are usually  taken  in PA view,  but for visualizing 
the thoracic  spine,  AP view  is preferred. 
The 'view'  can also  be expressed  by mentioning  the surface  facing 
the X-ray  plate.  Thus  AP view  can also  be called  as posterior  view, 
and the PA view  as the anterior  view. 
208 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Similarly,  when  right  surface  of the body  faces  the plate,  it is called 
the right  lateral  view,  and when  the left surface  of the body  faces  the 
plate  it is called  the left lateral  view. 
Oblique  and other  special  views  are taken  to visualize  certain  special 
structures. 
RADIOGRAPHIC  PROCEDURES 
1. Fluoroscopy 
Fluoroscopy  is of special  advantage  in observing  the movements  of the 
organs  (lungs,  stomach,  intestines,  etc.),  and in changing  the position  of 
the subject  during  the examination. 
Fluoroscopy  is done  in a dark  room. 
The fluoroscopic  image  is visualized  directly  on the fluorescent  screen 
which  is covered  with  a sheet  of lead  glass  to absorb  the X-rays  and to 
protect  the fluoroscopist. 
The sharpness  of the fluoroscopic  image  is inferior  to that  of a 
radiograph. 
Fluoroscopic  image  is photographed  by a camera  in mass  miniature 
radiography  (MMR)  by which  the masses  can  be surveyed  for the 
detection  of diseases  such  as tuberculosis. 
2. Plain  Radiography 
A natural  X-ray  image,  obtained  directly  without  using  any contrast 
medium,  is called  a plain  skiagram  or a plain  radiograph.  Plain 
radiography  is particularly  useful  in the study  of normal  and abnormal 
bones,  lungs,  paranasal  air sinuses  and gaseous  shadows  in the abdomen 
(Fig.  10.1). 
3. Contrast  Radiography 
The various  hollow  viscera  and body  cavities  cannot  be visualized  in 
plain  radiographs  due to their  poor  differential  radiopacity.  However, 
their  contrast  can be accentuated  by filling  such  organs  or cavities  with 
either  a radiopaque  or a radiolucent  substance.  Radiography  done  after 
artificial  accentuation  of the contrast  is called  contrast  radiography  . 
The radiopaque  compounds  used  in contrast  radiography  are: 
1. Barium  sulphate  suspension  (emulsion)  in water  for gastrointestinal 
tract (Fig.  10.2). 
Fig. 10.1:  Plain  radiography  of abdomen 
Fig. 10.2:  The  stomach  and  small  intestine  visualised  by barium  meal Principles  of Radiography  I 209 
210 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
2. The  aqueous  solution  of appropriate  iodine  compounds,  for urinary 
and biliary  passages  and the vascular  system. 
Special  Procedures 
1. Computerized  tomography  (CT  scanning):  Computerized 
tomography  is a major  technological  breakthrough  in radiology, 
especially  neuroradiology  (Fig.  10.3). 
It provides  images  comparable  to anatomical  slices  (3-6  mm thick) 
of the brain,  in which  one can distinguish  tissues  with  even  slight 
differences  in their  radiodensity,  viz. CSF,  blood,  white  and grey 
matter,  and the neoplasms. 
Differentiation  between  vascular  and  avascular  areas  can  be 
enhanced  by simultaneous  injection  of a radiopaque  medium  in 
the vessels. 
Thus  CT scanning  helps  in the diagnosis  of the exact  location  and 
size of the tumours,  haemorrhage,  infarction  and malformations, 
including  hydrocephalus,  cerebral  atrophy,  etc. 
This  technique  is also  called  as CAT  (computerized  axial 
tomography)  scanning  because  it provides  images  in transverse, 
or axial  plane. 
Fig. 10.3:  CT scan  of the thorax 
2. Ultrasonograph:  Ultrasonic  diagnostic  echography  is a safe 
procedure  because  instead  of X-rays  the high  frequency  sound 
waves  are used.  These  sound  waves  are reflected  by the acoustic 
Principles  of Radiography  I 211 
interface  (different  tissues)  back  to their  source  and are recorded 
in a polarised  camera. 
The sound  waves  used  are above  the range  of human  hearing,  i.e. 
above  20,000  cycles  per second,  or 20 kilohertz  (hertz  = cycles 
per second).  As the technique  is quite  safe,  it is especially  valuable  in 
obstetric  and gynaecological  problems.  Figures  10.4  and 10.5  show  the 
ultrasound  of the neck  and thyroid  gland 
Fig. 10.4:  Ultrasound  of the neck  and  thyroid  gland 
MAGNETIC  RESONANCE  IMAGING 
The MRI  uses  a strong  magnet  and pulses  of radiowaves.  A pulse  of 
radiowaves  of the appropriate  frequency  displaces  hydrogen  nuclei  from 
their  new  alignment.  They  return  to their  position  immediately  after  the 
pulse  ceases.  At the same  time  they  release  the energy  absorbed  as a 
radio  signal  of the same  frequency  which  is detected.  The signal  returned 
is proportional  to the concentration  of the protons.  This  is converted  by 
computer  into an analogue  image  presented  on a screen.  MRI  can produce Trachea 
Right  lobe  of thyroid  Left  lobe  of thyroid 
Common  carotid  artery  Common  carotid  artery 
212 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Temporal 
lobe 
Basilar 
artery 
Mid brain 
Cerebellum 
Fig. 10.5:  Magnetic  resonance  imaging  of brain. 
axial  images  resembl  ing those  of CT. It has the great  advantage  that images 
can also  be produced  in any other  plane.  This  can also  used  for tissue 
characterization  and blood  flow  imaging. 
INTERVENTIONAL  RADIOLOGY 
Interventional  radiology  involves  a wide  variety  of procedures.  These 
include: 
•Percutaneous  catheterization  and  embolisation  in the 
treatment  of tumours  is done  to reduce  tumour  size and vascularity 
prior  to operation  in difficult  cases. 
• Percutaneous  transluminal  dilatation  and  arterial  stenosis  for 
the treatment  of localized  stenosis  in the arteries. 
• Needle  biopsy  under  imaging  control  for lung  tumours  and 
abdominal  masses. 
• Transhepatic  catheterization  of the bile  ducts  for draining  in 
obstructive  jaundice. 
• Needle  puncture  and  drainage  of cysts  in the kidney  or other 
organs  using  control  by simple  X-ray  or ultrasound. Nasal  septum  Lens Left eyeball 
Sphenoidal 
Cerebral 
peduncle 
Occipital 
lobe 
Anatomical  Word 
Meanings  and 
Historical  Names 
A Anglo-Saxon E English  It  Italian 
Ar Arabic F French  L  Latin 
C Chinese G Greek  S  Sanskrit 
Du Dutch Gr German 
Afferent coming  towards 
Anus ring 
(G) Artery blood  vessel 
(L) Articulation joint 
(G) Arytenoid like a pitcher 
(G) Ascites bag-like  (fluid  collection) 
Astrocyte star-shaped 
Atavism a remote  ancestor  (epiphysis) 
Atelectasis incomplete  expansion 
Atheroma tumour 
Atlas carry  earth  on head  — 1 st cervical  vertebra 
Atresia no hole 
(L) Atrium central  open  part 
(G) Atrophy ill-nourished 
(L) Auditory related  to hearing 
Auerbach Auerbach's  plexus  of autonomic  nerves 
(German  anatomist) between  longitudinal  and  circular  coats  of 
gastrointestinal  tract 
(L) Auricle diminutive  of ear 
Auscultation to hear  with  attention 
Autonomic self-controller 
(G) Autopsy self-seeing 
(L) Avulsion to tear away 
(L) Axilla armpit 
(L) Axis carry  (pillar)—2nd  cervical  vertebra 
213 
214 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(G) Azygous unpaired—azygous  vein  in thorax 
(F) Ballotment tossing 
Basilic medial  vein  of arm 
Basophilic basic  stain  of nucleus 
(L) Bile fluid 
Biliverdin green  bile 
Bilirubin red bile 
(G) Bio life 
Birth bearing  of offspring 
(A) Bladder watery  swelling 
(G) Blepharitis eyelid  inflammation 
(L) Bolus mass 
(A) Bone bar 
(F) Boss a hump 
(G) Botany grass 
Bowman Bowman's  capsule,  Bowman's  memb, 
(English  surgeon) Bowman's  muscle  of ciliary  body 
(L) Brachium arm 
(G) Brady slow 
(G) Brain upper  part of head 
(G) Branchia gills of fishes  - branchial  arches 
(A) Breast bursting  forth 
(A) Breech lower  part of trunk  and thigh 
(G) Bregma forepart  of head 
Brown-Sequard Brown-Sequard  syndrome  - hemisection  of 
(British  neurologist) spinal  cord 
Broca Broca's  area  - speech  centre 
(French  surgeon) 
(G) Bronchus windpipe 
(G) Bronchiole terminal  air tube 
(F) Bruise to break 
Brunner Brunner's  duodenal  glands 
(Swiss  anatomist) 
(L) Bucia cheek 
(L) Buccinator trumpeter 
(E) Buffer cushion  to soften  blow 
(L) Bulb as onion 
(L) Bulbar medulla  oblongata 
(L) Bulbocavernosus 
(L) or 
Bulbospongiosus accelerator  of urine 
(L) Bulla bubble 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names ; 215 
(It) Bunion swelling 
(G) Burdach post,  column  of spinal  cord 
(Greek  anatomist) 
Bursa a purse 
(E) Buttock end (prominence  post,  to hip) 
(L) Cadaver a dead  body 
(L) Caecum blind 
Cesarean  section cutting  uterus  for taking  out a baby 
(Julius  Caesar  was  born) 
(F) Caisson box 
Cajal Cajal  stain 
(Spanish  histologist) 
(L) Calamine red 
(L) Calculus little stone 
(L) Calvaria vault  of cranium 
(L) Calcaneus bone  of foot 
(L) Calcar spur (calcarine  sulcus) 
(L) Calcar  femorale strong  plate  of bone  in front  of lesser  trochanter 
supporting  neck  of femur  (spur-shaped) 
(L) Calcarine  fissure spur-shaped 
Calcination to make  bone 
Calyx covering  of bud/shell 
Calveria vault 
Camper superficial  fascia  of anterior  abdominal  wall 
(Dutch  anatomist) 
(L) Canal channel  or furrow 
Canal  of Arnold for lesser  petrosal  nerve 
Canal  of Schlemm at cornea-scleral  junction 
(L) Cancellous lattice  work 
(L) Cancer crab-like 
(L) Canine related  to dog (teeth) 
Cannula hollow,  tubular  instrument 
(L) Capillary like hair of head  (caput),  fine tube 
Capsule a small  box 
(L) Caput head 
Capitulum in humerus  (lateral  part of lower  end) 
Caput  Medusae (head  of witch)  seen  because  of 
dilatation  of veins  at umbilicus  due to 
cirrhosis  of liver 
(L) Carbohydrate made  of carbon,  hydrogen  and water 
Caput  succedaneum swelling  produced  on presenting  part of fetal 
head during  labour 
(G) Cardia heart 
216 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
<L) Caries decay  of bone  and teeth 
(L) Carina structure  with  a projecting  central  ridge 
(L) Caro flesh 
(G) Carotid to throttle  (blood  vessel) 
Carotid  tubercle ant. tubercle  of 6th cervical  vertebra 
(L) Carpus wrist 
(L) Cartilage gristle 
(L) Castrate to cut off 
(G) Catarrh to flow  down 
Catgut from  intestine  of sheep 
(L) Cauda tail 
Caudate Caudate  nucleus,  Caudate  lobe  (tail-shaped) 
(E) Caul cap (fetal  membrane  with  fluid) 
(G) Causalgia burning  pain 
(L) Cavernous full of compartments 
(L) Cell small  room 
Cement binding 
Centrifuge fleeing  away  from  centre 
(G) Centrosome body  centre 
(G) Cephalic to head  (cephalic  vein) 
(L) Cera wax 
(L) Cerebellum little brain 
(L) Cerebrum brain 
(L) Cerumen ear wax 
(L) Cervix neck,  e.g. cervix  of uterus,  cervical  rib 
(G) Chancre venereal  disease 
Chemotaxis reaction  of living  cells  to chemical  agents 
Chest box 
(G) Chiasma crossing  over 
(G) Chitin coat 
(G) Chole bile 
(G) Cholesterin solid bile 
(G) Chord a cord  of string,  e.g. chorda  tympani  nerve 
Chordata animals  with  notochord 
(G) Chorea dancing  (disease  of basal  gang) 
(G) Chorion skin 
(G) Chromosome coloured  bodies 
(G) Chyme juice 
Cilium eyelid 
(L) Cingulum girdle 
(L) Circle  of Haller venous  circle  in areola  of female  breast 
(L) Circular  sinus sinus  around  pituitary 
Circle  of Willis arterial  circle  at base  of brain 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names ; 217 
(L) Circulation 
(L) Circum 
Cirrhosis 
Cisterna 
(L) Claustrum 
Clavicle 
Cledio 
(G) Climacteric 
Clinic 
Clinoid 
(G) Clitoris 
(L) Clivus 
(L) Cloaca 
(G) Clonus 
(L) Coagulation 
(L) Coarctation 
(G) Coccyx 
(L) Cochlea 
(G) Coelenterate 
(G) Coeliac 
(G) Coelome 
Cohnheim  (scientist) 
Colic 
(G) Collagen 
Colloidion 
Colon 
Colostrum 
Colpotomy 
(L) Commissure 
(L) Complement 
(L) Concha 
(L) Concussion 
(G) Condyle 
(L) Conjugate 
(L) Conjunctiva 
(L) Conus 
(G) Coracoid 
(L) Corneum 
(G) Corona 
(L) Corpus motion  in circle 
around,  e.g. circumflex  artery 
to turn reddish  yellow 
reservoir  (at base  of brain) 
barrier 
diminutive  of key 
closes  the thorax,  clavipectoral  fascia 
step of a stair (menopause) 
at the bed side 
surround  pituitary  fossa  like four  posts  of bed 
tender  (female  external  genitalia) 
slope  of a hill - part of cranial  fossae 
drain  or sewer  (dilated  part of hindgut) 
confused  motion 
to curdle 
to press  together  (coarctation  of aorta) 
cuckoo  (coccyx  resembles  bill of a cuckoo)  -
lowest  part of vertebral  column 
snail (internal  ear) 
hollow  (internal) 
belly  (c. axis artery  for stomach) 
hollow 
Cohnheim's  areas  in skeletal  muscle 
pain in intestine 
glue producing  substance 
glue-like 
large  intestine 
first milk  secreted  by breasts 
cutting  through  vagina 
join together 
I fill up 
shell (in lat. wall  of nose) 
a shaking 
knob  formed  by knuclle  of any joint 
yoked  together 
mucus  membrane  of eye 
cone 
a crow-like  process  of scapula 
most superficial  layer  of epithelium  of skin 
crown,  e.g. corona  radiata  and coronal  suture 
corona  glandis  (coronary  arteries,  coronary 
sulcus) 
body,  e.g. corpus  callosum,  corpus  luteum 
218 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
<L) Corpuscle a little  body,  pacinian  corpuscle,  thymic 
corpuscle 
(L) Corrugator wrinkler 
(L) Cortex outer  bark  (grey  matter) 
(L) Cortex rind (outer  layer) 
(L) Costa rib 
(A) Cough violent  expulsion 
Cowper Cowper's  gland  near upper  end of male  urethra 
(S) Coxa hip 
Cramp to contract 
(L) Cranium skull 
(G) Creatine (flesh)  a non-protein  nitrogenous  substance 
from flesh 
(G) Cremaster a suspender  (of testis) 
Crepitus a little  noise 
(L) Creta a chalk  (CaC0 3) 
(F) Cretin congenital  myxoedema 
(L) Cribriform sieve-like,  e.g. cribiform  fascia  of thigh 
(G) Cricoid ring, e.g. cricoid  cartilage 
(L) Crista crest 
Crista  galli cock's  comb 
(L) Crus shin bone  or leg 
(L) Crural leg 
(L) Cruciate cross-like 
(L) Crypt underground  vault  (hidden) 
(G) Crystal clear ice 
(L) Cubitus elbow 
(G) Cuboid cube-like 
(L) Culture growth 
(L) Cuneiform wedge-shaped 
Cupola dome-shaped 
(L) Curriculum a course  of study 
(L) Cusp point  of a spear  (cusp  of valve) 
(L) Cutis skin 
(F) Cuvier  (anatomist) ducts  of Cuvier 
(G) Cyclops one-eyed  giant 
(L) Cyst bladder,  cystic  duct 
Cytoplasm spread  outside  the nucleus 
(G) Dacryocyte tear-drop 
(G) Dactylitis finger  inflammation 
Dale histamine  discovered  by Dale 
(English  physician) 
(E) Dandruff skin scabs 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names ; 219 
(S) Dartos leather 
Darwin  tubercle projection  in upper  part of ear 
(L) Decalcify process  which  extracts  Ca ++ 
(L) Deci one tenth 
(L) Deciduous falling  off 
Decompression decreased  pressure 
(L) Decubitus lying  down 
(L) Decussate intersection  of two lines 
(L) Defecate to evacuate  the bowels 
(L) Degenerate structural  impairment  of a tissue 
(L) Deglutition action  of swallowing 
Deiters Deiters  cells  in internal  ear 
(German  anatomist) 
(G) Deltoid triangular  in shape,  deltoid  muscle,  deltoid 
ligament 
(L) Dementia to be mad 
(F) Demilune half moon,  demilune  of Giannuzzi 
(G) Dendron tree, dendrites  of neuron 
Denonvilliers fascia  between  rectum  and prostate  is 
(French  surgeon) Denonvilliers'  fascia 
(L) Dens tooth-like  dens  of 2nd vertebra/axis 
(L) Dentate tooth-like,  dentate  lig. of pia mater,  dentate 
gyrus  of brain 
(Gr) Dermis skin 
Descemet Descemet's  membrane  of cornea 
(French  surgeon) 
(L) Desquamate to scale  off 
(L) Detrusor to thrust  away,  detrusor  muscle  of urinary 
bladder 
(L) Dexter right 
(G) Diagnosis thro knowledge 
(G) Dialysis to loose  from  one another 
(G) Diapedesis leading  through 
(G) Diaphragm a partition 
(G) Diaphysis growing  through 
(G) Diarrhoea flowing  through 
(G) Diarthrosis joint 
(G) Diastole a pause 
(G) Diathermy very hot 
(G) Dichotomous cut in half 
(G) Didelphys double  uterus 
(G) Diencephalon between  brain 
(G) Diet a way of living 
220 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(G) Digastric double  belly 
(L) Digestion to dissolve 
(L) Digit finger 
(G) Diphtheria leather-like  membrane 
(G) Diploe double  layers  (deiploe  of some  of the skull 
bones) 
(F) Disease not well 
(L) Dislocation pulled  out of place 
(L) Dissect cut apart 
(G) Diuresis increased  urination 
(L) Diverticulum a small  cul-de-sac 
(L) Doctor a teacher  and a healer 
(G) Dolichocephalic long head 
(L) Dorsum back 
(It) Douche to pour 
Douglas pouch  of Douglas  (rectouterine  pouch) 
(Scottish  anatomist) 
(L) Duct to conduct 
(L) Duodenum width  of 12 fingers 
Dupuytren Dupuytren's  contracture 
(French  surgeon) 
(L) Duramater hard mother 
(G) Dys (prefix) bad, e.g. dysentery,  dyspepsia, 
dysmenorrhoea 
(G) Ectoderm outside  skin 
(G) Ectopia displacement  (out of place) 
(G) Ectropion to turn from 
(G) Eczema anything  thrown  out by heat 
Edinger Edinger-Westphal  nuclei  of III N 
(German  anatomist) 
Effector to effect 
(L) Efferent going  away 
(L) Element a rudiment 
(G) Elephantiasis elephant-like  legs 
(G) Embed holding  in place 
(G) Embolus a plug 
(G) Embryo something  that grows  in another's  body 
(G) Emesis vomiting 
(L) Emissary escape  channels  (emissary  veins  connecting 
intracranial  sinuses  with  extracranial  veins) 
(L) Empirical experienced,  not scientific 
(L) Emulsion milk-like  mixture 
(F) Enamel coating  on metal 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names ; 221 
(F) Enarthrosis ball and socket  joint 
(G) Encephalon brain  plus  head 
(G) Endarteritis blockage  within  arteries 
(G) Endemic native 
(G) Endo  (prefix) within,  e.g. endocrine,  endolymph,  endomet-
rium,  endothelium 
(G) Enema to inject 
(L) Ensiform sword-like,  xiphoid  process 
(G) Enteric gut 
(G) Enuresis urine  passed 
(G) Enzyme which  causes  fermentation 
(G) Eosin pink 
(G) Ependyma wrap 
(G) Epicondyle upon  a knob 
(G) Epicranius upon  head 
(G) Epicritic fine touch 
(G) Epidermis upon  dermis 
(G) Epididymis upon  testis 
(G) Epigastrium upon  belly 
(G) Epiglottis upon  tongue 
(G) Epihyal part of 2nd arch 
(G) Epilepsy a seizure 
(G) Epinephrine hormone 
(G) Epiploic omental 
(G) Episiotomy cutting  the pudendum  (perineum) 
(G) Epispadius upon  a tear 
(G) Epistaxis to trickle 
(G) Epithelium upon  nipple 
(G) Epoophoron upon  egg-bearing 
Erb Erb's  palsy  (C 5, 6) 
(German  neurologist) 
(L) Erector to stand  up 
(G) Erotic love 
(L) Eructation throwing  upwards 
(G) Ethmoid sieve-like 
(G) Etiology giving  the cause 
(G) Etymology true analysis  of a word 
(G) Euthanasia painless  death 
(L) Eustachius eustachian  valve 
(Italian  anatomist) 
(L) Evolution to unroll 
(G) Exacerbation to irritate 
(L) Exogenous on the outside 
222 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(L) Experiment an active  test 
(L) Extension stretch  out 
(L) Exteroceptor outward  receptor 
(L) Exude to sweat  out 
(L) Facet a little  face 
(L) Facial related  to face (L) 
Falciform/Falx sickle-shaped 
Fallopius fallopian  tube 
(Italian  anatomist) 
(L) Fascia a bandage 
(L) Fasciculus a passage 
(L) Febris fever 
(L) Femur thigh 
(L) Fenestra window 
(L) Ferment warm 
(L) Fetus offspring 
(L) Fibula needle  of brooch  (bone) 
(L) Filament small  thread 
(L) Filaria a thread 
(L) Fimbria a fringe/border 
(L) Fissure cleft 
(L) Fistula a pipe 
(L) Flagellum a whip 
(L) Flatus to blow 
(L) Flavine yellow 
(L) Flex to bend 
(L) Flocculus a tuft of wool 
(L) Folium leaf 
(L) Follicle a bag 
Fontana spaces  of Fontana 
(Italian  anatomist) 
(L) Fontanelle small  fountain 
(L) Foramen hole 
(L) Forensic pertaining  to law, courts  - Forensic  medicine 
(L) Fornix an arch 
(L) Fossa ditch 
(L) Fourchette little fork 
(L) Fovea a small  pit 
(L) Frenulum bridle,  e.g. Franulum  of tongue,  of clitoris. 
of penis 
(L) Frontal forehead 
(L) Fundus larger  part 
(L) Fundiform sling-shaped  . 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names 1 223 
(L) Funiculus cord 
(L) Fusiform spindle-shaped 
(E) Gag to suffocate 
Galea helmet,  galea  aponeurotica 
Galen vein of Galen,  (great  cerebral  vein) 
(Roman  physician) 
(A) Gall bile 
(G) Gamete a married  person 
(G) Ganglion a knot 
(L) Gastric belly 
(G) Gastrocnemius calf of leg 
(G) Gastrula belly 
(G) Gene unit of heredity 
Genetics study  of natural  development  of race 
(L) Genial chin 
(L) Genu bend,  knee,  (genu  of corpus  callosum) 
(G) Genus family 
(G) Geriatrics study  and treatment  of old persons 
(L) Gustatory sense  of taste 
(L) Gyrus convolution 
(L) Haeme blood 
Haematoxylin stain 
(L) Hallux big toe 
(A) Hamstring a little  hook 
Hartman gall bladder  cyst near  cystic  duct 
(German  anatomist) 
(L) Haustrum bucket-shaped  haustration  of large  intestine 
Havers haversian  gland  - pad of fat in joints 
(English  physician) 
Heister Heister's  valve  (in gall bladder) 
(German  anatomist) 
(G) Helicotrema an opening  between  two scala  of cochlea 
(G) Helix a coil 
Helmholtz Helmholtz  theory  of color  vision 
(German  physician) 
Henle Henle's  loop,  Henle's  layer  in hair follicle 
(German  anatomist) 
Hensen Hensen's  node 
(German  physician) 
(G) Hepar liver 
(G) Hermaphrodite both sexes 
(L) Hernia rupture 
(G) Herpes to spread 
224 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(G) Hctero different (G) 
Hilton Hilton's  line 
(English  surgeon) 
(L) Hilum depression 
(G) Hippocampus sea horse 
Hirschsprung Hirschsprung's  disease  (congenital 
(Danish  physician) megacolon) 
(G) Histamine tissue  amine 
(G) Histo anything  woven 
(G) Histology study  of woven  structures/tissues 
(L) Homo a man 
(G) Hormone to set in motion 
Horner Horner's  syndrome 
(Swiss 
ophthalmologist) 
Hunter Hunter's  canal  (add.  canal) 
(Scottish  surgeon) 
(G) Hyaline glass-like;  hyaline  cartilage 
(G) Hybrid of double  origin 
(F) Hydatid a drop  of water 
(G) Hydrocele water  + hernia 
(G) Hygiene healthy 
(G) Hymen membrane 
(G) Hyoid U-shaped 
(G) Hyper in excess  of 
Hypnosis state of being  asleep 
(G) Hypoblast endoderm 
(G) Hypodermic under  the skin 
(G) Hypothesis placing  under 
(G) Hyster uterus 
(G) Icterus a yellow  bird (jaundice) 
(G) Idiopathic 'unknown' 
(G) Idiosyncrasy  (allergy) individual  peculiarity 
(G) Ileum twisted  gut 
(L) Ilium hip bone 
(L) Immunity exemption  or protection 
(L) Incise to cut into 
(L) Incubation to sit or brood 
(L) Incus an anvil  (ear ossicle) 
(L) Index a pointer 
(8) Indigo blue dye 
(L) Inducium a tunic 
I. griesum a grey  tunic 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names 1 225 
<L) Infant not speaking 
(L) Infarct necrotic 
(L) Infection a bending  inward 
(L) Inflame to set aflame 
(L) Infra below 
(L) Inguinal the groin—inguinal  canal 
(G) Inion below  occiput 
(L) Injection putting  in 
(L) Innominate unnamed 
(L) Inoculate to ingraft 
(L) Inquest inquire 
(L) Insanity unsound  mind 
(L) Insemination seed 
(L) In situ manner  of lying  in local  position 
(L) Instrument to equip 
(L) Insufflation to blow  into 
(L) Insula island 
(L) Internuncial inter-messenger 
(L) Intestine internal 
(L) Intoxication to smear  with  poison 
(L) Intra inside 
Intrinsic special  to the thing  itself 
(L) Intussusception within  receive 
(L) Invagination enclose  in a sheath 
(L) Involution to roll up 
(G) Iodine violet 
(G) Iris coloured  membrane  of eye 
(G) Ischaemia lack of blood  supply 
(G) Ischium bone (part  of hip bone) 
(G) Isotonic equal  tension 
(G) Isotope equal  place 
(L) Isthmus narrow,  isthmus  of fallopian  tube 
(L) Iter a passage  (iter cerebri) 
(F) Jaundice yellowness 
(L) Jejunum empty  or fasting 
(L) Joint to join 
(L) Jugular the throat 
Jugam yoke 
(G) Karyo a nut (nucleus) 
Keith Keith's  SA node 
(English  anatomist) 
(G) Keratin horn-in  hairy  layer  of skin 
(G) Kilo one thousand 
226 I Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Klumpke 
(French  neurologist) 
Kupffer 
(Greek  anatomist) 
Kymograph 
(G) Kyphosis 
(L) Labrum 
Labial 
(L) Labour 
(L) Lac 
(G) Labyrinth 
(L) Lacrimal 
(L) Lacunae 
(G) Lambda 
(L) Lamina 
(L) Lancet 
Langerhans 
(German  anatomist) 
(L) Lanugo 
(L) Larva 
(G) Larynx 
(L) Latent 
(L) Laxative 
(Gr) Lemniscus 
(Gr) Leprosy 
(Gr) Leptomeninx 
(L) Lethal 
(Gr) Lethargy 
(Gr) Leuc 
(L) Levator 
(L) Libido 
(G) Lieberkuhn 
(German  scientist) 
Lienal 
Ligament 
(L) Limbus 
(L) Limen 
(L) Linea 
(L) Lingual 
(S) Lipoma 
(Gr) Lithos 
(L) Locus Klumpke's  paralysis 
Kupffer  cell (sinusoids  of liver) 
a wave  writer 
hump  on back 
lip 
pertaining  to lips 
work 
milk 
maze 
tear 
hollow 
inverted  Y-shaped  suture 
a thin plate 
a slender  spear 
islet of Langerhans  (pancreas) 
first soft hair of beard 
ghost 
upper  part of wind  pipe 
to lie hidden 
loosening 
bandage 
scaly  disease 
tender  membrane  (pia and arachnoid) 
death 
forgetful 
white,  leucocyte,  leucoplakia,  leucorrhoea 
one who  lifts 
desire,  lustre 
crypts  of Lieberkuhn  (intestine) 
spleen 
to bind,  e.g. deltoid  ligament,  falciform 
ligament,  etc. 
a border 
edge or threshold  - L. insulae 
a line 
the tongue 
fat 
a stone 
a place 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names 1 227 
(G) Lordosis increased  anterior  curvature  of lumbar  spine 
Louis Louis's  angle  of sternum  (sternal  angle) 
(French  physician) 
Lower projection  in the right  atrial  wall  between  the 
(English  physician) two caval  openings 
(L) Ludwig Ludwig's  angina 
(German  surgeon) 
(L) Lumbar loin 
Lumbrical a worm  (a muscle) 
(L) Lumen light passage 
(L) Lunar the moon 
Lutein yellow  pigment  of corpora  lutea 
(German  anatomist) 
(L) Lymph clear  water 
(Gr) Macro big 
Macroscopic big to see 
(L) Macula a small  patch  (macula  lutea,  macula  densa) 
Magendie Foramen  of Magendie 
(French  doctor) 
(G) Malacia softness 
(F) Malady illness 
(L) Malar cheek  bone 
Malaria bad air 
(L) Malignant ill-disposed 
(L) Malleus hammer—ear  ossicle 
(L) Malleolus a little  hammer 
Mallory Mallory's  stain 
(Irish  anatomist) 
Malpighi Malpighian  corpuscle,  Malpighian  layer  in 
(Italian  anatomist) skin 
Founder  of Histology 
(L) Mamma the breast 
(L) Mandible lower  jaw 
(Gr) Mania madness 
(L) Manubrium a handle  (Manubrium  sterni) 
(Gr) Marasmus waste  away 
Marchi Marchi's  staining  for nerve  fibres 
(Irish  anatomist) 
Marginal artery  border,  along  large  intestine 
(L) Marrow medulla 
Marshall Marshall's  vein—oblique  vein  of left atrium 
(English  surgeon) 
(Gr) Masseter the chewer 
228 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(Gr) Mast to feed 
(Gr) Mastos breast 
(L) Mastication to chew 
(L) Matrix mould 
(L) Mature to ripe—maturation (L) 
Maxilla cheek 
McBurney McBurney  point  for appendicectomy 
(American  surgeon) 
(L) Meatus canal 
Meckel Meckel's  cave  for 5th N. ganglion,  Meckel's 
(German  anatomist) cartilage 
Meatus canal 
(L) Median central 
(L) Mediastinum middle  space 
(L) Medicine the art of healing 
(L) Medulla marrow 
Medusa caput  medusa 
(Greek  goddess) 
(L) Mega big 
Meibom meibomian  glands 
(German  anatomist) 
(L) Meiosis lessening 
Meissner Meissner's  plexus  in submucous  coat  of GIT 
(L) Melan black 
Melanin black  pigment 
(G) Meninges a membrane 
Meningocoele memb.  + hernia 
(G) Meniscus crescent  (med.  cat. menisci  in knee  joint) 
(G) Men (prefix) month,  e.g.  menopause,  menorrhagia. 
menstruation,  menarche 
(Gr) Merkel corpuscle  sensory  nerve  ending 
(Gr) Mesencephalon mid-brain 
(Gr) Mesenchyme middle  infusion  or juice 
(Gr) Mesentery middle  intestine 
Mesoderm middle  skin 
(G) Mesonephros middle  kidney 
(G) Mesothelium middle  nipple 
(G) Metacarpus from  wrist 
(G) Metamorphosis changed  form 
(G) Metanephros after  kidney 
(G) Metastasis removal  from  one place 
(G) Metencephalon after  brain 
(G) Metopic frontal,  space  between  eyes—M.  suture 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names 1 229 
(G) Metre unit of length 
Meynert Dorsal  teg. decusation 
(Austrian  physician) 
(G) Microbe small  life 
(G) Microcyte small  cell 
(G) Microglia small  glue  (cells) 
(G) Micrometer small  measure 
(G) Microscope small  eye-view 
(G) Microtome small  cutting 
(G) Mitochondria the thread  grain 
(G) Mitosis thread 
(L) Mitral kind of cap 
(G) Mneomonic relating  to memory 
(L) Molar milestone—a  tooth 
(E) Mole spot 
Monro foramen  of Monro—interventricular 
(English  scientist) foramen  of brain 
Montgomery Montgomery's  tubercles  in the nipple 
(Irish  obstetrician) 
(L) Morbid ill 
Morgagni appendix  of testis 
(Italian  anatomist) 
(F) Morgue mortuary 
Morison Morison's  pouch  (hepatorenal  pouch) 
(English  surgeon) 
Moron dull 
(G) Morphology shape/discourse 
(L) Morula mulberry 
(L) Mucus thin watery  fluid,  mucosa 
Muller Muller's  muscle  in eye (circular),  mullerian 
(German  anatomist) duct 
(L) Multiparous more  than  once  pregnant 
(L) Murmur a humming  sound 
(L) Muscle a little  mouse;  myology 
(G) Museum temple  of muses 
(L) Mutation to change 
(L) Mydriatic unnatural  dilatation  of pupil 
(G) Myopia close  to eyes 
(G) Myxoma mucus  + tumor 
Naboth Nabothian  glands 
(German  anatomist) 
(L) Naevus birth  mark (L) 
Nagek Nagek  pelvis  (obliquely  contracted  pelvis) 
(German  obstetrician) 
230 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(E) Nape ext. depression,  knob (E) 
Narcolepsy numbness 
(L) Nares nostril,  nasal 
(G) Nausea sickness 
(A) Navel umbilicus 
(L) Navicular boat-shaped 
(G) Necrosis a dead  body 
(G) Neo new 
Neolithic new stone 
Neoplasm new form 
(G) Nephr kidney 
Nephropexy kidney  + fastening 
(L) Nerve string,  N. root 
(G) Neuralgia pain in nerves 
(G) N. crest on either  side  of neural  tube 
(G) Neurasthenia nerve  weakness 
(G) Neurilemma nerve  covering 
(G) Neurobiotaxis nerve  + life + arrangement  of nerves  in living 
(L) Neutrophil neuter  (not  fond  of any color) 
Nipple beak 
Nissl Nissl  granules  in neurons 
(German  neurologist) 
(L) Nodus knot 
(L) Nomenclature a list of names 
(G) Nostalgia home  coming  + pain 
(G) Notochord back  + a string 
(Ar) Nucha spinal  cord 
(Du) Nuck canal  of Nuck 
(L) Nucleus nut 
(L) Nullipara none  + bring  forth,  not yet pregnant 
(L) Nurse to nourish 
(G) Nyctalopia night  blindness 
(G) Nystagmus nodding 
(Gr) Obelian a pointed  pillar  portion  of sagittal  suture 
between  2 parietal  bones 
(L) Obstetrix midwife 
Obstetrics Surgery,  dealing  with  pregnancy,  labour 
Obturator a stopper  of 
Occiput back  of head 
Occult hidden 
Oculus eye 
Oddi sphincter  of Oddi 
(Irish  physician) 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names 1 231 
(G) Odontoid tooth-like 
(G) Oesophagus gullet 
(L) Oestrus madness  or frenzy 
(G) Olecranon point  of elbow 
(L) Olfaction to smell 
(G) Oligo few 
(G) Omohyoid shoulder  + hyoid  bone 
(G) Omphalos omphalocoele  (umb.) 
(G) Oopheron ovary 
(L) Operation to work 
(L) Operculum lip 
(Gr) Ophth eye 
(Gr) Optics belonging  to sight,  optic  chiasma;  optic  disc 
(L) Oral of mouth 
(L) Orbicularis circular 
(G) Orchitis testicle  inflammations 
(L) Organ any part of the body  with  a special  function 
(Gr) Osmosis push 
(L) Ossicle small  bone 
(Gr) Otic ear, 0. ganglion 
(L) Ovary egg receptacle 
(G) Oxyntic to make  sour 
Pacchioni arachnoid  granulations 
(Italian  anatomist) 
(Gr) Pachymeninx thick  membrane 
Pacini pacinian  corpuscle 
(Italian  anatomist) 
(G) Paediatrics child  + healing 
Paget Paget's  disease 
(English  surgeon) 
(G) Palaco old 
(L) Pallid pale 
(L) Pallium clock  or mantle 
(L) Palpate to touch 
(L) Palpebra eyelid 
Palsy paralysis 
(L) Pampiniform tendril 
(G) Panacea all healing 
(G) Pan sweet  bread 
(G) Pandemic all people 
(L) Panniculus a piece  of cloth,  a layer  of membrane, 
panniculus  carnosus 
(L) Paraffin little affinity 
232 • Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Paradidymus beside  + twin-like 
(Gr) Paralysis weakening 
Parametrium beside  the uterus 
Paraphimosis constriction  of the prepuce  behind  the glans 
penis 
Paraplegia paralysis  of lower  limbs 
Parenchyma functional 
Parietal a wall 
Paronychia beside  nail 
Para beside 
Passavant Passavant's  ridge 
(German  surgeon) 
(L) Patella a small  dish (sesamoid  bone) 
(L) Pecten a comb 
(L) Pectoral belonging  to breast 
(L) Pedicle a little  foot 
Peduncle a foot 
Pellagra skin attack 
(L) Pelvis a basin 
(L) Penis tail 
(L) Percussion beating 
(L) Perforator to bore  through 
(G) Peri around 
(G) Perilymph clear watery  fluid  all around 
(G) Perineum swim  around  penis 
(G) Periosteum around  bone 
(G) Periphery circumference 
Peristalsis contracting  around 
Peritoneum serous  membrance  lining  abdomen 
(G) Peroneus anything  pointed  for piercing 
(L) pes-a  foot hippocampus  (foot-like) 
(L) pessary an oval  body  (plug) 
Petit Petit's  triangle 
(French  surgeon) 
(L) Petrous stony,  rock,  P. temporal  bone 
Peyer Peyer's  patch  (ileum) 
(Swiss  anatomist) 
(G) Phagocytosis eat + cell + osis (fullness),  i.e., eating  cells 
(G) Phalanx closely  knit row 
(G) Pharynx musculo  memb.  sac behind  the mouth 
(L) Philtrum a love  charm 
(Gr) Phimosis stopping  up (in relation  to prepuce  of penis) 
(Gr) Phonation sound  or voice 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names 1 233 
(Gr) Physiotherapy nature  + treatment 
(L) Pia mater soft mother 
(L) Pineal pine cone 
(L) Pinna ear 
(L) Piriform pear-shaped 
(L) Pisiform pea-shaped 
(L) Pituitary mucus  secretion 
(L) Placenta flat cake 
Planes flat 
Plantar sole of foot 
(Gr) Platysma flat 
(Gr) Pleo more 
(Gr) Plethora fullness 
(Gr) Pleura serous  memb.  enfolding  lung 
(L) Plexus woven 
(L) Plica to fold 
(L) Plumbus lead 
(L) Pneumo gas 
(Gr) Podagra foot 
(Gr) Podalic foot 
(L) Polarity relating  to pole 
(Gr) Polio grey matter  + inflammation 
(L) Pollex thumb  (strong) 
(Gr) Poly many 
(L) Pons bridge 
(L) Popliteus ham 
(L) Porta gate 
(L) Post behind 
Poupart Poupart's  ligament  (inguinal  ligament) 
(French  anatomist) 
(L) Pregnant with child 
(L) Prepuce foreskin 
(Gr) Presbyopia old age hypermetropia 
(Gr) Proposis elephant's  trunk 
(L) Process advance 
(L) Procidentia parts  that fall out of place 
(Gr) Prodo anus 
(Gr) Prodromal in advance 
(L) Progesterone before  to bear 
(Gr) Prognosis to know  beforehand 
Prolapse falling 
Proliferate create  or reproduce  in quick  succession 
(L) Promontory prominence 
234 • Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(L) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(I.) 
(L) 
(E) 
(L) 
(L) 
(L) 
(L) 
(L) 
(Gr) 
CGr) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(G) 
(L) 
(L) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(L) 
(L) 
(L) Pronator 
Pronephros 
Prophylaxis 
Proprioceptive 
Prosencephalon 
Prostate 
Prosthetic 
Protamine 
Protein 
Protocol 
Protopathic 
Pruritis 
Psoas 
Psyche 
Pterion 
Pterygoid 
Ptoma 
Ptosis 
Ptyalin 
Pubis 
Pud 
Puerperal 
Puke 
Pul (prefix) 
Puke 
Pulvinar 
Punctum 
Putamen 
Pyelo 
Pylorus 
Pyramid 
Pyrexia 
Quadri 
Quadratus 
Quadriceps/quadri 
Quartz 
Rabies 
Racemose 
Rachitis 
Radical 
Radium 
Radius 
Ramus to bend  forward 
before  kidney 
to keep  guard  (the prevention  of a disease) 
one's  own,  to take 
forward  + brain 
before  + stand 
in addtion 
first + amine 
comprised  of amino  acid 
first glue 
first + suffering 
itching 
loin 
breath 
wing 
wing-like 
a corpse 
falling 
saliva 
puberty 
to be ashamed  (pudendal) 
after delivery 
to vomit 
lung 
beating 
cushion,  pillow 
point 
cutting 
basin 
gatekeeper 
swelling 
fever 
four 
square 
geminus  four  heads/two  twins 
rock crystal 
rage/madness 
cluster  of grapes  (glands) 
spine 
roots 
radioactive  element 
small  bone  of forearm 
branch 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names 1 235 
Ranvier node of Ranvier 
(French  histologist) 
(Gr) Raphe suture 
(L) Rash eruption  of skin 
Rathke Rathke's  pouch 
(German  anatomist) 
(L) Receptor to receive 
(L) Rectum upright  (misnomer) 
(L) Recurrent running  back 
(L) Refraction broken  (bend) 
Reid R. base  (from  lower  margin  of orbit  through 
(Scottish  anatomist) centre  of ext. aud.  meatus) 
Reil island  of Reil-Insula 
(Greek  physiologist) 
Reissner R. fibres  running  through  the length  of 
(Greek  anatomist) brainstem  and spinal  cord 
Remarc R. fibre/non-medullated  nerve  fibre 
(German  neurologist) 
(L) Resection cut off 
(L) Resin to flow 
(L) Restiform  body rope-shape  (inferior  cerebellar  peduncle) 
(L) Rete a net, R. mirabile  - a wonderful 
network,  R. testis  - tubular  network 
(L) Reticulum a little  net 
(L) Retinaculum to hold  back 
(L) Retort twisted  back 
(L) Retro  (prefix) behind,  retroverted,  retroflexed  uterus,  retroph. 
space 
Retzius space  of Retzius 
(Swedish  scientist) 
(Gr) Rheumatism a liability 
(Gr) Rhinencephalon nose + brain 
(Gr) Rhinoplasty nose moulding 
(Gr) Rhomboid rhombus-like 
(Gr) Rhonchus snoring 
(L) Rigor rigidity 
(L) Rima slit, rima  glottidis 
(L) Risus to laugh,  risus  sardonicus 
Robertson Argyll  Robertson  pupil  (pupil  sign) 
(Scottish 
ophthalmologist) 
Robin perivas/space  in brain 
(German  histologist) 
236 • Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Rolando fissure  of Rolando 
(Italian  anatomist) 
Rosenmuller fossa  of Rosenmuller  (Lat.  pharyngeal 
(German  anatomist) recess) 
(L) Rostrum beak  of a bird 
(L) Rebella red 
Ruffini nerve  endings  of skin 
(Italian  anatomist) 
(L) Rugat wrinkled 
(L) Saccharin sugar 
(L) Sacrum holy 
(L) Sagittal arrow 
(Gr) Salpina trumpet 
Santorini Santorini's  cartilage,  Santorini's  duct 
(Italian  anatomist) accessory  duct  of pancreas 
(Gr) Saphenous clear,  easily  seen.  S. vein 
(Gr) Sarco flesh,  sarcolemma 
(L) Sartorius tailor 
(L) Scala stairway  (scala  tympani,  scala  vestibuli) 
(Gr) Scalenus irregular 
(L) Scalpel knife 
(Gr) Scaphoid boat-shaped 
(L) Scapula shoulder  blades 
Scarpa Scarpa's  fascia,  (deeper  membranous  layer  of 
Italian  anatomist) sup. fascia)  Scarpa's  ganglia  8th N. ganglia 
(Gr) Schizophrenia split mind 
Schlemm Schlemm's  canal  at corneo-scleral  junction 
(German  anatomist) 
Schwann cell of Schwann 
(German  anatomist) 
(L) Sciatica pain in loins 
(L) Scirrhus hard 
(Gr) Sclera hard 
(Gr) Scoliosis curvature  (lateral) 
(L) Scrotum skin or hide 
(L) Sebum grease 
(L) Segmentation to cut 
(L) Sella  turcica Turkish  saddle 
(L) Semen that which  is sown 
(L) Semi half 
(L) Septum a dividing  wall 
(L) Serratus like saw 
(Gr) Sesamoid seed-like  (patella) 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names 1 237 
Sharpey Sharpey's  fibres  in compact  bone 
(English  anatomist) 
Sihson S. fascia 
(Gr) Sigmoid sigma-like 
Sims  position lithotomy  position 
(L) Sinus anything  hollowed  out 
(Gr) Skeleton dried  up 
(L) Soleus sole 
(Gr) Soma body 
(L) Soporific deep sleep 
(L) Spatula flat wooden  instrument 
(Gr) Sperm seed 
Sphenoid butterfly  shaped 
(Gr) Sphincter bind/tight 
(L) Spine thorn 
(Gr) Splanchnic relating  to bowels 
(Gr) Splenius bandage 
(Gr) Spondylitis vertebra  inflammation 
(Gr) Spondylolisthesis vet + sliding 
(L) Squama scale  of fish 
(L) Stapes stirrup  (ear ossicle) 
(Gr) Stasis standing 
(Gr) Stenosis narrowing 
Stensen Stensen's  duct,  parotid  gland  duct 
(Danish  anatomist) 
(Gr) Stethoscope instrument  of listening  the ausculatory  sounds 
(L) Stimulus to prick 
(Gr) Stoma mouth 
(Gr) Stomach mouth  bed 
(Gr) Strabismus squinting 
(L) Stratum covering 
(L) Stria furrow 
(L) Stricture contraction 
(L) Strider harsh 
(Gr) Stroma bed 
(Gr) Styloid pointed 
(L) Sub under 
(L) Subclavian under  clavicle 
(L) Substantia essence 
(L) Sudor sweat 
(L) Sulcus furrow 
(L) Super over,  above 
(L) Supination bent backwards 
238 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
<L) Sural calf of leg 
(Gr) Surgeon hand  + work  (operator) 
(L) Sustentaculum support  (sustentacular  tali) 
(L) Stitch sewing  together 
Sylvius Sylvius'  fissure,  Lat. fissure  of the brain 
(German  anatomist) 
(Gr) Symbiosis living  with 
(Gr) Symphysis natural  union 
(Gr) Syndrome running  together 
(G) Synovia along  with  + egg 
(L) Syringe like a pipe  (tube) 
(Gr) Syringomyelia pipe + marrow 
(Gr) Systole contraction 
(L) Tabes wasting  away 
(Gr) Taenia rope-like  structure,  T. thalami,  T. col: 
hookworms 
(L) Talipes weak  on feet 
(L) Talus ankle  bone 
(L) Tapetum carpet 
(Gr) Tarsus Crate  - bones  of post,  part of foot 
(L) Tectum to cover 
(Gr) Telangiectesis end vessel  dilatation 
(L) Tellurium earth 
(L) Temple  (temporal) temple  region 
(L) Tendon to stretch  out 
Tenon T. capsule  (back  of eyeball) 
(German  surgeon) 
(L) Tensor stretch  out 
(L) Tentorium tent 
(L) Teres round 
(L) Testicle testis  (singular) 
(Gr) Tetanus stretch,  tetany 
(Gr) Thalamus inner  chamber 
(Gr) Thallium young 
Thebesius Thebesian  valve,  valve  of coronary  sinus 
(German  physician) 
(Gr) Thenar the part of the hand  with  which  one strikes 
(Gr) Theory speculation 
(Gr) Therapy care 
(Gr) Thrombus rump 
(L) Thymus leaf used  for worship 
(Gr) Thyroid shield  (oblong) 
(L) Tibia shin bone  (flute) 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names 1 239 
Gr) 
(Gr) 
(A) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(L) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(L) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(Gr) 
(Gr) 
(L) 
(L) 
(L) 
(L) Tissue 
Tone 
Tooth 
Topography 
Torticollis 
Torus 
Tourniquet 
Toxin 
Trabeculae 
Trachea 
Tract 
Tragus 
Transfusion 
Trapezium 
Trauma 
Treitz 
(Austrian  physician) 
Trema 
Tremor 
Trendelenburg 
(German  surgeon) 
Trephine 
Treves 
(English  surgeon) 
Triceps 
Trichiasis 
Tricuspid 
Trigeminal 
Trigone 
Triquetral 
Trocar 
Trochanter 
Trochlea 
Trophic 
Tropism 
Tube 
Tumour 
Turbinate 
Tympanum 
Typhoid 
Tyson 
(English  anatomist) woven 
which  can be stretched 
an organ  of mastication 
a place  + description 
twisted 
bulging  place 
instrument  for turning 
poison 
a little  beam 
wind  pipe 
pathway 
ear 
pouring  out 
table 
wound 
lig of Treitz  at duo-jej.flexure 
hole 
shaking 
Trendelenburg's  position,  Trendelenburg's 
sign and Trendelenburg's  test 
a saw for cutting  out circular  piece  of bone 
esp. skull 
bloodless  fold  of Treves 
having  three  heads 
hair (trichionis) 
three  cusps 
three  + twin-like  (3 divisions) 
triangle 
having  3 corners 
3 quarters 
bony  process 
pulley 
nourishment  (trophoblast) 
burning 
a trumpet 
swelling 
spinning  top 
kettle  drum 
fever  typhus  like 
Tyson's  glands,  seb. glands  on inner  side of 
prepuce 
240 1 Handbook  of General  Anatomy HHHMHH 
(L) Ulcer sore 
(L) Ulna elbow 
(L) Umbilicus naval 
Umbo tymp.  membrane 
(L) Unciform hook-shaped 
(L) Undulant fever,  wave 
(Gr) Urachus urinary  canal  of foetus 
(Gr) Uranium heaven 
(Gr) Ureter urinary  duct 
(Gr) Urethra to make  water 
(Gr) Urobilin urine  + bile 
(L) Urticaria to burn 
(L) Uterus womb 
Utricle a little  uterus 
(L) Uvea grape 
(L) uvula a little  grape 
(L) Vaccine lymph  from  cow-pox  vesicle 
(L) Vagina sheath 
(L) Vagus vagabond  (wanderer) 
(L) Valency capacity 
Valentine discovered  nucleolus  and sex cords  of ovary 
(German  physician) 
Valentine V. bodies  in N. tissue 
(German  anatomist) 
(L) Valgus bow-legged 
Valsalva Valsalva  sinuses  aortic  sinuses 
(Italian  anatomist) 
(L) Valve leaf of folding  door 
(L) Varix  (varicose) dilated  veins 
Varolius pons  varolii 
(Italian  anatomist) 
(L) Varus grown  inwards,  knock  knee  - genu  varus 
(L) Vas vessel 
(L) Vastus large 
Vater ampulla  of Vater 
(German  anatomist) 
(L) Vector one that bears 
(L) Velum curtain 
(L) Venereal belonging  to Venus  (goddess  of love) 
(L) Venter belly,  ventricle 
(L) Vermis worm 
(L) Vertebra turning  place  or joint 
(L) Vertigo to turn  around. 
Anatomical  Word  Meanings  and  Historical  Names 1 241 
Vesalius Father  of Anatomy 
(Belgian  anatomist) 
(L) Vesica bladder 
(L) Vestibule enclosed  space 
(L) Vestigeal remnant  of something  formerly  present 
(L) Veterinary cattle  doctor 
Vidius vidian  nerve,  nerve  of pterygoid  canal 
(Italian  physician) 
(L) Villus tuft of hair 
Virchow V. robin  space 
(German  pathologist) 
(L) Virus poison 
(L) Viscus/viscera vital organ/plural 
(L) Vision act of seeing 
(L) Vital to life 
(L) Vitamin life + amine 
(L) Vitelline yolk of egg 
(L) Vocal  cords uttering  of voice 
(L) Volar palm  of hand 
Volkmann V. canal 
(German  physician) 
(L) Voluntary willing 
(L) Volvulus to roll 
(L) Vomer thin plate  of bone  between  nostrils 
(L) Vulva to roll, to turn around 
Waldeyer W. ring at oropharyngeal  isthmus 
(German  anatomist) 
Waller Wallerian  nerve  degeneration 
(English  physician) 
Westphal W. nucleus  (part  of oculomotor  complex) 
(German  neurologist) 
Wharton W. duct (Submand.  duct),  Wharton's  jelly 
(English  anatomist) 
Whisky water  of life 
Whitlow painful  swelling  in finger 
(E) Whooping  cough to call/shout 
Widal W. reaction 
(French  physician) 
Willis circle  of Willis 
(English  Anatomist) 
Winslow foramen  of Winslow 
(Danish  anatomist) 
Wirsung pancreatic  duct 
242 • Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
(German  anatomist) 
Wistar 
(American  anatomist) 
Wolff 
(German  anatomist) 
Wright 
(American  anatomist) 
(Gr) Xanthine 
Xeroderma 
(Gr) Xiphoid 
Xylol 
Yellow  fever 
Young 
(English  physician) 
Zenker 
(German  histologist) 
Zinn 
(German  anatomist) 
(L) Zona 
(Gr) Zoology 
Zuckerkandl 
(Austrian  anatomist) 
Zygoma 
Zymogen pyramids  (in kidneys) 
Wolfian  or mesonephric 
W. stain 
yellow 
dry or parched 
sword-like 
wood  + oil 
an infectious  viral  fever 
Young's  rule 
Zenker's  solution 
annulus  of Zinn  (origin  of rectus) 
zone 
animal  + treatise 
Zuckerkandl's  gyrus,  subcallosal  gyrus 
like a yoke ferment  producer,  Z. granules  in serous  acini 
References  and 
Suggestions  for 
Additional  Reading 
CHAPTER  1 
Field,  E.J.  and  Harrison,  R.J.  (1957).  Anatomical  Terms,  their  Origin  and 
Derivation,  2nd edn.  Heffer,  Cambridge. 
Major,  R.H.  (1954).  A History  of Medicine,  2 volumes.  Thomas,  Springfield. 
Singer,  C., (1957).  A Short  History  of Anatomy  from  the  Greeks  to Harvey. 
Dover,  New  York. 
Singh,  S. (1972).  Grave-robbers  all. Science  Reporter,  9: 492-493. 
Singh,  S. (1972).  The Illustrious  Hunters  and the Anatomy  Museums.  Indian 
Med.  Gaz.,  12: 62-66. 
Singh,  S. (1973).  Cadaveric  supply  for anatomical  dissections,  a historical 
review.  Indian  J. History  Med.  18: 35-39. 
Singh,  S. (1974).  Susruta,  pioneer  in human  dissections.  Souvenir,  Anat.  Soc. 
India,  31-32. 
CHAPTER  2 
Athawale,  M.C.  (1963).  Estimation  of height  from  lengths  of forearm  bones: 
A study  of one hundred  Maharashtrian  male  adults  of ages between  tw enty-
five and thirty  years.  Am. J. Phys.  Anthropol.,  21: 105 11 2. 
Bajaj,  I.D.,  Bhardwaj,  O.R and Bhardwaj,  S. (1967).  Appearance  and fusion 
of important  ossification  centres:  A study  of Delhi  population.  Indian  J. 
Med.  Res.,  55: 1064-1067. 
Berry,  A.C.  (1975).  Factors  affecting  the incidence  of non-metrical  skeletal 
variants.  J. Anat.,  120:  519-535. 
Brahma,  K.C.  and Mitra,  N.L.  (1973).  Ossification  of carpal  bones: 
A radiological  study  in the tribals  of Chotanagpur.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India, 
22: 21-28. 
Charnalia,  V.M.  (1961).  Anthropological  study  of the foot and its relationship 
to stature  in different  castes  and tribes  of Pondicherry  State.  J. Anat.  Soc. 
India,  10: 26-30. 
243 
244 • Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Chhatrapati,  D.N.  and Misra,  B.D.  (1967).  Position  of the nutrient  foramen 
on the shafts  of human  long  bones.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  16: 1-10 
Das Gupta,  S.M.,  Prasad,  V. and Singh,  S. (1974).  A roentgenologic  study  of 
epiphysial  union  around  elbow,  wrist  and knee  joints  and the pelvis  in 
boys and girls  of Uttar  Pradesh.  J. Indian  Med.  Assoc.,  62: 10-12. 
Garg,  K„ Bahl,  I., Mathur,  R. and Verma,  R.K.  (1985).  Bilateral  asymmetry 
in surface  area  of carpal  bones  in children.  J. Anat.  Soc.  Ind. 
34: 167-172. 
Garg,  K., Kulshrestha,  V., Bahl,  I., Mathur,  R, Mitta,  S.K.  and Verma, 
R. (1988).  Asymmetry  in surface  area  of capitate  and hamate  bones  in 
normal  and malnourished  children.  J. Anat.  Soc.  Ind. 37: 73-74. 
Gupta,  A., Garg,  K., Mathur,  R. and Mittal,  S.K.  (1988).  Asymmetry  in surface 
area of bony  epiphysis  of knee  in normal  and malnourished  children.  Ind. 
Paed.  No.  10: 999-1000. 
Halim,  A. and Siddiqui  M.S.  (1976).  Sexing  of atlas.  Indian  J. Phys.  Anthropol. 
Hum.  Genet.,  2: 129-135. 
Hasan,  M. and Narayan,  D. (1963).  The ossification  centres  of carpal  bones: 
A radiological  study  of the times  of appearance  in U.P.  Indian  subjects. 
Indian  J. Med.  Res.,  51: 917-920. 
Hasan,  M. and Narayan,  D. (1964).  Radiological  study  of the postnatal 
ossification  of the upper  end of humerus  in U.P.  Indians.  J. Anat.  Soc. 
India,  13: 70-75. 
Jeyasingh,  P., Saxena,  S.K.,  Arora,  A.K.,  Pandey,  D.N.  and Gupta,  C.D.  (1980). 
A study  of correlations  between  some  neonatal  and placental  parameters. 
J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  29:  14-18. 
Jit, I. (1957).  Observations  on prenatal  ossification  with  special  reference  to 
the bones  of hand  and foot.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  6: 12-23. 
Jit, I. (1972).  Times  of ossification  in India  (editorial).  Bull.  PGI  (Chandigarh), 
6: 100-103. 
Jit, I. (1979).  The house  of skeletons  case.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  28: 106-116. 
Jit, I., Jhingan,  V. and Kulkarni,  M. (1980).  Sexing  of human  sternum.  Am. J. 
Phys.  Anthropol.,  53:  217-224. 
Jit, I. and Gandhi,  O.P.  (1966).  The value  of preauricular  sulcus  in sexing 
bony  pelvis.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  15: 104-107. 
Jit, I. and Kulkarni,  M. (1976).  Times  of appearance  and fusion  of epiphysis 
at the medial  end of the clavicle.  Indian  J. Med.  Res.,  64: 773-782. 
Jit, I. and Singh,  S. (1956).  Estimation  of the stature  from  the clavicle.  Indian 
J. Med.  Res.,  44: 133-135. 
Jit, I. and Singh,  S. (1966).  Sexing  of the adult  clavicle.  Indian  J. Med.  Res., 
54: 551-571. 
Jit, I. and Singh,  B. (1971).  A radiological  study  of the time  of fusion  of 
certain  epiphyses  in Punjabees.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  20: 1-27. 
References  and  Suggestions  for Additional  Reading  I 245 
Jit, I., Verma,  U. and Gandhi,  O.P.  (1968).  Ossification  of bones  of the hand 
and foot  in newborn  children.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  17: 8-13. 
Kate,  B.R.  (1964).  A study  of the regional  variation  of the Indian  femur,  the 
diameter  of the head,  its medicolegal  and surgical  application.  J. Anat. 
Soc. India,  13: 80-84. 
Kate,  B.R.  (1967).  The  angle  of the femoral  neck  in Indians.  East. 
Anthropologist,  20:  54-60. 
Kate,  B.R.  (1971).  Nutrient  foramina  in human  long  bones.  J. Anat.  Soc. 
India,  20: 139-144. 
Kate,  B.R and Majumdar,  R.D.  (1976).  Stature  estimation  from  femur  and 
humerus  by regression  and autometry.  Acta  Anat.,  94: 311-320. 
Kolte,  P.M.  and Bansal,  P.C.  (1974).  Determination  of regression  formulae 
for reconstruction  of stature  from  the long  bones  of upper  limb  in 
Maharashtrians  of Marathwada  region.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  23: 6-11. 
Krogman,  W.M.  (1962).  The  Human  Skeleton  in Forensic  Medicine.  Thomas, 
Springfield,  111. 
Longia,  G.S.,  Ajmani,  M.L.,  Saxena,  S.K.  and Thomas,  R.J. (1980).  Study  of 
diaphysial  nutrient  foramina  in the human  long  bones.  Acta  Anat.,  107: 
399-406. 
Maniar,  B.M.,  Seervai,  M.H.  and Kapur,  P.L. (1974).  A study  of ossification 
centres  in the hand  and  wrist  of Indian  children.  Indian  Pediatr., 
II: 203-211. 
Modi,  N. J. (1977).  Modi's  Textbook  of Medical  Jurisprudence  and  Toxicology, 
20th edn,  pp. 27-38  and 80-88,  Tripathi,  Bombay. 
Mysorekar,  V.R.  (1967).  Diaphysia  nutrient  foramina  in human  long  bones. 
J. Anat.,  101:  813-822. 
Mysorekar,  V.R.  and Nandedkar,  A.N.  (1979).  Diaphysial  nutrient  foramina 
in human  phalanges.  J. Anat.,  128:  315-322. 
Mysorekar,  V.R.,  Verma,  P.K.,  Nandedkar,  A.N.  and Sarma,  T.C.S.R.  (1980). 
Estimation  of stature  from  parts  of bones,  lower  end of femur  and upper 
end of radius.  Medicine  Science  and  Law  (Lond.),  20:  283-286. 
Mysorekar,  V.R.,  Nandedkar,  A.N.  and Sarma,  T.C.S.R.  (in press).  Estimation 
of stature  from  parts  of humerus  and radius.  Medicine.  Science  and Law 
(Lond.). 
Narayan,  D. and Bajaj,  J.D.  (1957).  Ages  of epiphysial  union  in long  bones 
of inferior  extremity  in U.P.  subjects.  Indian  J. Med.  Res., 
45: 645-649. 
Patake,  S.M.  and Mysorekar,  V.R.  (1977).  Diaphysial  nutrient  foramina  in 
human  metacarpals  and metatarsals.  J. Anat.,  124:  299-304. 
Pillai,  M.J.S.  (1936).  The study  of epiphysial  union  for determining  the age 
of South  Indians.  Indian  J. Med.  Res..  23; 1015-1017. 
246 • Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Prakash,  S., Chopra,  S.R.K.  and Jit, I. (1979).  Ossification  of the human 
patella.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  28: 78-83. 
Qamra,  SR, Jit, I. and Deodhar,  S.D.  (1980).  A mode  for reconstructing  height 
from  foot measurements  in an adult  population  of north-west  India.  Indian 
J. Med.  Res.,  71; 77-83. 
Raju,  P.B.  and Singh,  S. (1978).  Sexual  dimorphism  in scapula.  J. Indian 
Acad.  Forens.  Sci.,  17:  23-34. 
Raju,  B.P. and Singh,  S. (1979).  Sexual  dimorphism  in hip bone.  Indian  J. 
Med.  Res..  69; 849-855. 
Raju,  P.B.,  Singh,  S. and Padmanabhan,  R. (1981).  Sex determination  and 
sacrum.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  30: 13-15. 
Saxena,  S.K.,  Jeyasingh,  P., Gupta.  A.K.  and Gupta,  C.D.  (1981).  Estimation 
of stature  from  measurement  of head  length.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India, 
30: 78-79. 
Saxena,  S.K.,  Maewal,  S., Pandey,  D.N.  and Gupta,  C.D.  (1981).  A study  of 
correlationships  between  CR length  and neonatal  and placental  parameters. 
J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  30:  67-69. 
Siddiqui,  M.A.H.  and Shah,  M.A.  (1944).  Estimation  of stature  from  long 
bones  of Punjabees.  Indian  J. Med.  Res.,  32: 105-108. 
Singh,  B. and Sohal,  H.S.  (1952).  Estimation  of stature  from  the length  of 
clavicle  in Punjabees,  a preliminary  report.  Indian  J. Med.  Res., 
40: 67-71. 
Singh,  G., Singh,  S. (1976).  Identification  of sex from  the fibula.  J. Indian 
Acad.  Forens.  Sci.,  15:  29-34. 
Singh  G., Singh,  S.P. and Singh,  S. (1974).  Identification  of sex from  the 
radius.  J. Indian  Acad.  Forens.  Sci.,  13:  10-16. 
Singh,  G., Singh,  S. and Singh,  S.P. (1975).  Identification  of sex from  tibia. 
J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  24:  20-24. 
Singh,  I. (1978).  The  architecture  of cancellous  bone.  J. Anat., 
127: 305-310. 
Singh,  S. and Gangrade,  K.C.  (1968).  The sexing  of adult  clavicles.  Demarking 
points  for Varanasi  zone.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  17: 89-100. 
Singh  S. and Potturi,  B.R.  (1978).  Greater  sciatic  notch  in sex determination. 
J. Anat.,  127:  619-624. 
Singh,  S. and Raju,  P.B.  (1977).  Identification  of sex from  the hip bone, 
demarking  points.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  26: 111-117. 
Singh,  S. and Singh,  S.P. (1972).  Identification  of sex from  the humerus. 
Indian  J. Med.  Res.,  60: 1061-1066. 
Singh,  S. and Singh,  S.P. (1974).  Weight  of the femur,  a useful  measurement 
for identification  of sex. Acta  Anat.,  87: 141-145. 
Singh,  S. and Singh,  S.P. (1975).  Identification  of sex from  tarsal  bones. 
Acta Anat.,  93:  568-573. 
References  and  Suggestions  for Additional  Reading  I 247 
Singh  S., Singh,  G. and Singh,  S.P. (1974).  Identification  of sex from  the 
ulna.  Indian  J. Med.  Res.,  62: 731-735. 
Singh  S.P. and Singh,  S. (1972  a). The sexing  of adult  femora,  demarking 
points  for Varanasi  zone.  J. Indian  Acad.  Forens.  Sci.,  11: 1-6. 
Singh  S.P.  and Singh,  S. (1972  b). Identification  of sex from  the head  of a 
femur,  the demarking  points  of Varanasi  zone.  Indian  Med.  Gaz., 
12: 45^19. 
Srivastava,  K.K.,  Pai,  R.A.,  Kolbhandari,  M.P.  and Kant,  K. (1971). 
Cleidocranial  dysostosis:  A clinical  and cytological  study.  Clin.  Genet., 
2: 104-110. 
Tandon,  B.K.  (1964).  A study  of the vascular  foramina  at the two ends  of 
ulna.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  13: 24-27. 
Ujwal,  Z.S. (1962).  Nutrient  canal  of long  bones.  Univ.  Rajasthan  Studies, 
6: 39^3. 
Vare,  A.M.  and Bansal,  PC. 1977).  Estimation  of crown-rump  length  from 
diaphysial  lengths  of foetal  long  bones.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  26: 91-93. 
CHAPTER  3 
Barnett,  C.H.,  Davies,  D.V.  and MacConail,  M.A.  (1961).  Synovial  Joints: 
Their  Structure  and  Mechanics.  Longmans,  London. 
Freeman,  M.A.R.  (1973).  Adult  Articular  Cartilag.  Pitman  Medical,  London. 
Gardner,  E.D.  (1948).  The  innervation  of the knee  joint.  Anat.  Rec.,  101: 
109-131;  The innervation  of the shoulder  joint.  Anat.  Rec.,  102:  1-18, 
1948. 
Hilton,  J. (1891).  Rest  and Pain,  Ed. by W.H.A.  Jacobson,  reprinted  from  the 
last London  edition,  P.W.  Garfield,  Cincinnati. 
Kapandji,  I. A. (1970).  The Physiology  of the Joints.  Livingstone,  London. 
Kellgren,  J.H.  and Sarnual,  E.P.  (1950).  Sensitivity  and innervation  of the 
articular  capsule.  J. Bone  Jt. Surg.,  32b:  84-92. 
MacConail,  M.A.  (1932).  The function  of intra-articular  fibrocartilages,  with 
special  reference  to the knee  and inferior  radio-ulnar  joints.  J. Anat.,  66: 
210-227. 
MacConail,  M.A.  and Basmajian,  J.V. (1977).  Muscles  and  Movements. 
Krieger  Publishing  Company,  New  York. 
Steindler,  A. (1955).  Kinesiology  of  the  Human  Body.  Thomas, 
Springfield,  111. 
CHAPTER  4 
Basmajian,  J.V. (1967).  Muscles  Alive,  2nd edn.  Williams  and Wilkins, 
Baltimore. 
248 • Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Burke,  R.E.,  Levine,  D. and Tsiaris,  R (1973).  Physiological  types  and 
histochemical  profiles  in motor  units  of the cat gastrocnemius.  J. Physiol., 
Lond.,  234:  723-748. 
Dubowitz,  V. (1969).  Histochemical  aspects  of muscle  disease.  In: Disorders 
of voluntary  Muscle  (Walton,  J.N. ed.),  Churchill,  London. 
Gauthier,  G.F.  and Schaeffer,  S.F. (1974).  Ultrastructural  and cytochemical 
manifestations  of protein  synthesis  in the peripheral  sarcoplasm  of 
denervated  and  newborn  skeletal  muscle  fibres.  J. Cell  Sci., 
143: 113-137. 
Jaya,  Y. (1957).  A brief  exposition  ofAVA,  histologically  and radiologically. 
Proc.  Acad.  Med.  Sc.,  Hyderabad,  1:  15-21. 
Jaya,  Y. (1962).  Quantitative  anatomy  of the capillaries  in the rat muscles. 
J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  11:  32-34. 
Kate,  B.R.  (1971).  The cartilage  modification  of the periosteum.  J. Anat. 
Soc. India,  20: 28-32. 
MacConail,  M.A.  and Basmajian,  J.V. (1977).  Muscles  and  Movements. 
Krieger  Publishing  Company,  New  York. 
Sadasivan,  G. and Hanmant  Rao,  G. (1964).  Arteriovenous  anastomosis  in 
skeletal  muscle.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  13: 90-95. 
CHAPTER  5 
Bennett,  H.S.,  Luft,  J.S.  and  Hampton,  J.C.  (1957).  Morphological 
classification  of vertebrate  blood  capillaries.  Am.  J. Physiol.,  196: 
381-390. 
Clark,  E.R.  (1938).  Arteriovenous  anastomosis.  Physiol.  Rev.,  18: 229-247. 
Grant,  R.T. and Payling  Wright,  H. (1970).  Anatomical  basis  for non-nutritive 
circulation  is skeletal  muscle  exemplified  by blood  vessels  of rat biceps 
femoris  tendon.  J. Anat.,  106:  125-134. 
Rhodin,  J.A.G.  (1962).  The diaphragm  of capillary  endothelial  fenestrations. 
J. Ullrastruct.  Res.,  6: 171-185. 
Rhodin,  J.A.G  (1967).  Ultrastructure  of mammalian  arterioles  and precapillary 
sphincters.  J. Ultrastruct.  Res.,  18: 181-223. 
Rhodin,  J.A.G.  (1968).  Ultrastructure  of mammalian  venous  capillaries, 
venules  and small  collecting  veins.  J. Ultrastruct.  Res.,  25: 452-500. 
Simionescu,  N., Simionescu,  M. and Palade,  G.E.  (1975).  Permeability  of 
muscle  capillaries  to small  hemepeptides.  Evidence  for the existence  of 
patent  transendothelial  channels.  J. Cell  Biol.,  64: 586-607. 
Zweifach,  B.W.  (1959).  The  microcirculation  of the blood.  Scient. 
Am., 200;  54-60. 
References  and  Suggestions  for Additional  Reading  I 249 
CHAPTER  6 
Allen,  L. (1967)  Lymphatics  and  lymphoid  tissue.  A. Rev.  Physiol., 
29: 197-12.4. 
Boggon,  R.P.  and Palfrey,  A.J. (1973).  The microscopic  anatomy  of human 
lymphatic  trunks.  J. Anat.,  114:  389-405. 
Jamieson,  J.K. and Dobson,  J .F. (1910).  On the injection  of lymphatics  by 
Prussian  blue.  J. Anat.,  45: 7-10;  Lancet,  1: 1061-1066,  1907;  Proc.  R. 
Soc. Med.,  2: 149-174,  1908;  Lancet,  1: 493-495,  1910;  Br. J. Surg., 
8: 80-87,  1920. 
Kinmonth,  J.B. (1964).  Some  general  aspects  of the investigation  and surgery 
of the lymphatic  system.  J. Cardiovasc.  Surg.,  5: 680-682. 
Nopajaroonskri,  C., Luk,  S.C.  and Simon,  G.T.  (1971).  Ultrastructure  of the 
normal  lymph  node.  Am. J. Path.,  65.: 1-24. 
Roitt,  I.M.  (1977).  Essential  Immunology,  3rd edn.  Blackwell,  Oxford. 
Shridhar  (1964).  Roentgenographic  visualization  of human  lymphatics,  J. 
Anat.  Soc.  India,  13:  15—17. 
Steinman,  R.M.,  Lustig,  D.S.  and Cohn,  Z.A.  (1974).  Identification  ofanovel 
cell type  in peripheral  lymphoid  organs  of mice.  II. Functional  properties 
in vitro.  J. Exp.  Med.,  139:  380-397. 
William,  P.L. and Warwick,  R. (1980).  Gray's  Anatomy,  36th  edn.  Churchill 
Livingstone,  London. 
CHAPTER  7 
Glees,  P. and Hasan,  M. (1976).  Lipofuscin  in Neuronal  Aging  and  Diseases. 
Georg  Thieme  Verlag,  Stuttgart. 
Glees,  P., Hasan,  M. and Tischner,  K. (1966).  Trans-synaptic  atrophy  in the 
lateral  geniculate  body  of the monkeys.  J. Physiol.  (Lond.) 
188: 17-19. 
Grey,  E.G.  Morphology  of synapses.  J. Anat.,  93: 420-423,  1959;  J. Anat., 
95: 345-356,  1961;  Prog.  Brain  Res.-31:  141-155,  1969;  In: Essays  on 
the Nervous  System  (Bellairs,  R. and Gray,  E.G.,  Eds).  Clarendon  Press, 
Oxford,  1974. 
Gregson,  N.A.  (1975).  The chemistry  of myelin.  In: The Peripheral  Nerve 
(London,  D.N.,  Ed.).  Chapman  & Hall,  London. 
Hasan,  M., Glees,  P. and Tischner,  K. (1967).  Electron  microscopic 
observations  on myelin  degeneration  in the lateral  geniculate  body  of 
blinded  monkeys.  J. Anat.  Soc.  India,  16: 1-11. 
Hasan,  M. and Glees,  P. (1972).  Oligodendrocytes  in the normal  and 
chronically  de-afferented  lateral  geniculate  body  of the monkeys.  Z. 
Zellforsch.,  135:  115-127. 
250 • Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Hasan,  M. and Glees,  P. (1972).  Electron  microscopic  appearance  of neuronal 
lipofuscin  using  different  preparative  techniques  freeze-etching.  Exp. 
Geront.,  7: 345-351. 
Hasan,  M. and Glees,  P. (1972).  Genesis  and possible  dissolution  of neuronal 
lipofuscin.  Gerontologia,  18: 217-236. 
Hasan,  M. and Glees,  P. (1974).  Electron  microscopic  study  of the changes 
in fibrous  astrocytes  of the lateral  geniculate  body  of blinded  monkeys.  J. 
Anat.  Soc.  India,  23:  1-4. 
Hasan,  M., Shipstone,  A.C.  and Bajpai,  V.K.  (1978).  Scanning  electron 
microscopy  of ventricular  ependyma.  Bull.  Electron  Microscopic  Soc. 
India,  2: 1-2. 
Jacobs,  S. and Jacob,  M. (1971).  Intersegmental  anastomoses  between 
adjacent  dorsal  roots  of spinal  cord  in the human.  Neurol.  India, 
19: 51-54. 
Jacob,  M. and Weddell,  G. (1975).  Neural  intersegmental  connections  in the 
spinal  roots  and  ganglion  region  of the rat.  J. Comp.  Neurol., 
161: 115-123. 
Linge,  E.A.  et al (1973).  Identification  of glial  cells  in the brain  of young 
rats. J. Comp.  Neurol.,  146:  43-72. 
Palay,  S.L.  and Chan  Palay,  V. (1977).  General  morphology  of neurons  and 
neuroglia.  In: Handbook  of Physiology  (Kandel,  E.R.,  Ed.),  Vol.  1, 
Part 2. Physiological  Society,  Bethesda. 
Shepherd,  G.M.  (1974).  The  Synaptic  Organization  of the Brain.  Oxford 
University  Press,  New  York. 
Singh,  I. (1982).  A Textbook  of Human  Neuroanatomy.  Vikas,  New  Delhi. 
Varon,  S. and Bunge,  R.P.  (1978).  Trophic  mechanisms  in the peripheral 
nervous  system.  Ann.  Rev.  Neurosci.,  1: 327-361. 
Williams,  PL. and Hall,  S.M.  (1971).  Prolonged  in vivo  observations  of normal 
peripheral  nerve  fibres  and their  acute  reactions  to crush  and local  trauma. 
J. Anat.,  108:  397^108. 
CHAPTER  8 
Cummins,  H. and  Midlo,  C. (1961).  Finger  Prints,  Palms  and  Soles:  An 
Introduction  to Dermatoglyphics.  Dover,  New  York. 
Montagna,  W. and Lobitz,  W.C.  (1964).  The  Epidermis.  Academic  Press, 
New York. 
Montagna,  W. and Parakkal,  P.F. (1974).  The Structure  and Function  of Skin, 
3rd edn.  Academic  Press,  New  York. 
Sinclair,  D. (1967).  Cutaneous  Sensation.  Oxford  University  Press,  London. 
Zelickson,  A.S.  (1967).  Ultrastructure  of  Normal  and  Abnormal  Skin. 
Kimpton,  London. 
References  and  Suggestions  for Additional  Reading  I 251 
Zelickson,  A.S.  (1971).  Ultrastructure  of the human  epidemis.  In: Modern 
Trends  in Dermatology  (Borrie,  P., Ed.),  Volume  4, Butterworth,  London. 
CHAPTER  9 
Garg,  K„ Bahl,  I. and Kaul  M. (1991).  A Textbook  of Histology.  CBS 
Publishers  & Distributors,  New  Delhi. 
Mitra,  N.L.  (1979).  A Short  Textbook  of Histology.  Scientific  Book  Agency, 
Calcutta. 
Ramachandran,  G.N.  (1967).  Treatise  on Collagen.  Academic  Press, 
New York. 
Serafini-Fracassini,  A. and  Smith,  J.W.  (1974).  The  Structure  and 
Biochemistry  of Cartilage.  Churchill-Livingstone,  Edinburgh,  London. 
Wagner,  B.M.  and Smith,  D.E.  (1967).  The  Connective  Tissue,  Williams  & 
Wilkins,  Baltimore. 
CHAPTER  10 
Griffiths,  H.J.  and Sarno,  R.C.  (1979).  Contemporary  Radiography.  An 
Introduction  to Imaging.  Saunders,  Philadelphia. 
Halim,  A. (1993).  Surface  and  Radiological  Anatomy,  2nd  edn.  CBS,  New 
Delhi. 
Index 
A 
Abdominal  aorta  107 
Abduction  16, 17, 60 
Accessory  36 
Accessory  ligaments  65 
Acetylcholine  143 
Achondroplasia  52 
Acne  vulgaris  178 
Acromioclavicular  66 
Acute  phlebothrombosis  120 
Adduction  16, 60 
Adduction  of digits  17 
Adjunct  rotation  73 
African  sleeping  sickness  167 
Ageing  166 
AIDS  167 
Albinism  189 
Alopecia  177 
Alzheimer's  disease  166 
Amphiarthrosis  58 
Anaemia  135,  177 
Anaesthesia  27 
Analgesia  27 
Anastomosis  22, 113 
Anatomical  position  10 
Anatomy  1 
Aneurysm  118 
Angina  pectoris  99 
Angiology  1 
Angular  movements  16 
Ankle  joint  66 Antagonists  97 
Anterior  13, 15 
Anti-spin  73 
Antrum  25 
Aplasia  27 
Apocrine  glands  179 
Aponeurosis  21, 85 
Appendicular  skeleton  37 
Appositional  growth  46 
Arches  175 
Arcuate  swing  73 
Arrectores  pilorum  178 
Arterial  anastomosis  113 
Arterial  pulsations  111 
Arteries  21, 102 
Arteriosclerosis  118 
Arteriovenous  anastomosis  113 
Arteritis  and phlebitis  118 
Arthritis  57 
Arthrology  1, 57 
Articular  capsule  65 
Articular  cartilage  65 
Astrocytes  144 
Atavistic  epiphysis  41 
Atheroma  118 
Atlanto-occipital  joints  69 
Atrophy  27 
Auscultation  2 
Autonomic  nervous  system  156 
Axial  skeleton  37 
Axillary  sheath  186 
Axis cylinder  153 
253 
254 • Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Axon  141 
Axon  reflex  107 
Axonotmesis  163 
B 
B-cells  126 
B-Lymphocytes  133 
Baldness  192 
Ball-and-socket  64 
Band  86 
Basle  nomina  anatomica  9 
Bed sores  164 
Bell's  palsy  165 
Belly  21 
Benign  27 
Between  femur  and patella  69 
Biaxial  72 
Biological  effect  207 
Bipennate  90 
Bipolar  142 
Birmingham  revision  10 
Blood  capillaries  124 
Blood  channels  130 
Blood  pressure  117 
Blood-brain  barrier  146 
Boil 190 
Bone  marrow  31 
Bone  marrow  biopsy  56 
Bone  tumour  56 
Brachial  107 
Buerger's  disease  119 
Burns  189 
Bursa  75 
c 
Cadaveric  anatomy  1 
Calcaneocuboid  joint  69 
Cancellous  spongy  37 
Cancer  28 
Capillaries  22, 103 
Capitulum  25 
Capsular  65 Capsular  or true ligaments  65 
Carcinoma  27 
Cardinal  swing  73 
Cardiovascular  system  101 
Carotene  173 
Carotid  sheath  186 
Carpal  tunnel  syndrome  193 
Carpals  30 
Carpometacarpal  66 
Cartilage  48 
Cartilaginous  bones  36 
Cartilaginous  joints  58 
Catecholamines  144 
Caudal  13, 16 
Cell body  139 
Cement  39 
Central  nervous  system  138 
Cerebrospinal  nervous  system  139 
Ceruminous  glands  180 
Cervical  lymph  nodes  128 
Circulating  pool  of lymphocytes 
127 
Circulus  vasculosus  76 
Circumduction  17, 60 
Circumduction  of thumb  17 
Circumpennate  90 
Cirrhosis  of liver  135 
Clavicle  30 
Cleavage  lines  174 
Cleidocranial  dysostosis  51 
Clinical  anatomy  4 
Close  packed  position  74 
Closure  of the mouth  19 
Clubbing  177 
Co-spin  73 
Coma  27 
Common  carotid  107 
Compact  bone  37 
Comparative  anatomy  4 
Complex  joint  60 
Composite/hybrid  muscle  95 
Compound  joint  60 
Compound  joints  72 
Computerized  tomography  210 
Condrosternal  66 
Condylar  joint  64 
Conjunct  rotation  73 
Connective  tissue  195 
Continuous  capillaries  112 
Contralateral  13 
Contrast  radiography  208 
Convalescence  28 
Cornified  zone  173 
Coronal  plane  13 
Coronary  arteries  blockage  118 
Cortex  40, 130 
Costochondral  joints  64 
Costotransverse  66 
Costovertebral  66 
Cranial  13 
Cricoarytenoid  joint  66 
Cricothyroid  joint  66 
CT scan  8 
Cysticerocosis  167 
D 
Damage  163 
Dark  bands  86 
Deep  13 
Degeneration  26 
Degrees  of freedom  72 
Dementia  166 
Dendrite  141 
Dense  irregular  connective  tissue 
196 
Dentine  39 
Dermatitis  189 
Dermatoglyphics  175 
Dermatome  149 
Dermis  or corium  173 
Diaphysis  32 
Diarthrosis  57, 58 
Dislocated  77 
Disseminated  lupus  erythematosus 
201 Index  I 255 
Distal  13 
Distributing  vessels  103 
Disuse  atrophy  99 
Dorsal  13, 15 
Dorsal  ramus  149 
Dorsal  root 149 
Dorsalis  pedis  107 
Dorsiflexion  of foot 18 
Du bois  formula  171 
Dupuytren's  contracture  202 
Dynamic  polarity  143 
Dystrophy  27 
E 
Eccrine  glands  179 
Elastic  cartilage  49 
Elbow  joint  66 
Electro-myography  2 
Elephantiasis  134 
Ellipsoid  joint  64, 69 
Embolism  26, 117 
Embryology  3 
Encephalopathy  168 
End-arteries  116 
Endochondral  ossification  46 
Endomysium  87 
Endoneurium  147 
Endoscopy  2 
Epicondyle  22 
Epidermis  173 
Epilepsy  169 
Epimysium  87 
Epineurium  147 
Epiphyses  32 
Epiphysial  arteries  45 
Epiphysial  plate  of cartilage  43 
Ethmoid  30 
Evagination  13 
Eversion  of foot 18 
Exchange  vessels  103 
Experimental  anatomy  4 
Extension  60 
256 • Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Extensor  15 
Extracellular  matrix  196 
Extrafusal  muscle  fibres  94 
Extrinsic  ligaments  198 
F 
Facet  25 
Facial  107 
Fallot's  tetralogy  177 
Female  surface  72 
Femoral  107 
Femur  30 
Fenestrated  capillaries  112 
Fibrillation  99 
Fibrocartilage  49 
Fibrous  astrocytes  144 
Fibrous  bone  39 
Fibrous  capsule  65 
Fibrous  joints  57 
Fibula  30 
First carpometacarpal  joint  69 
First chondrosternal  joint  64 
Fistula  26 
Fixators  97 
Flat bones  32 
Flexion  59 
Flexor  15 
Flexure  lines  174,  175 
Fluorescent  effect  207 
Foetal  medicine  8 
Fontanelles  61 
Foramen  22 
Foreign  body  giant  cells  132 
Fossa  22 
Fracture  52 
Frontal  30 
Fungal  infections  167 
Fusiform  88 
G 
Gaba  143 
Ganglion  203 Gangrene  27 
Gardner  76 
General  somatic  afferent  155 
General  somatic  efferent  155 
General  visceral  afferent  155 
General  visceral  efferent  155 
Genetics  4 
Germinative  zone  173 
Gift 8 
Glioblasts  145 
Glycine  143 
Golgi  type  I 142 
Golgi  type  II 142 
Gomphosis  61 
Groove  22 
Group  A fibre  156 
Group  B fibre  156 
Group  C fibre  156 
Guillain-Barre  syndrome  165 
H 
Haemal  nodes  131 
Haemoglobin  173 
Haemorrhage  26, 117 
Hair 178 
Hair follicle  178 
Hamulus  22 
Haversian  fatty  pads  75 
Heart  102 
Hemiplegia  27 
Herniation  of the disc  77 
Herpes  zoster  167 
Herpes  zoster  virus  189 
Herpes  simplex  167 
Heterotopic  bones  36 
Hinge  joint  64 
Hip bone  30 
Hip joint  71, 80 
Hirsutism  177 
Histamine  143 
Histology  3 
Hodgkin's  disease  132 
Human  genome  8 
Humerus  30 
Hyaline  cartilage  49, 75 
Hyoid  30 
Hyperaesthesia  27 
Hyperplasia  27, 99 
Hypertrophy  27, 99 
Hypoplasia  27 
I 
Ichthyosis  178 
Incisures  of schmidt  lanterman 
154 
Incudomalleolar  joint  69 
Incudostapedial  joint  71 
Incus  30 
Infarction  27 
Inferior  13 
Inferior  nasal  choncha  30 
Inflammation  26 
Insertion  83 
Inspection  2 
Intercarpal  joints  66 
Interchondral  joint  66 
Intermediate  fibres  88 
Intermetacarpal  66 
Intermetatarsal  66 
Intermuscular  septa  184 
Internode  154 
Interosseous  membrane  188 
Interphalangeal  joints  66 
Intertarsal  joints  66 
Interventional  radiology  212 
Intervertebral  joints  64 
Intra-articular  fibrocartilages  75 
Intrafusal  fibres  94 
Intramembranous  46 
Intrinsic  ligaments  198 
Invagination  13 
Inversion  of foot 18 
Ipsilateral  13 
Irregular  bones  32 
Irritation  of a motor  nerve  163 
Isometric  contraction  97 Index  I 257 
Isotonic  contraction  97 
J 
Jena nomina  anatomica  10 
Joint cavity  65 
Junctura  57 
K 
Keloid  192 
Knee  joint  68, 80 
Koilonychia  177 
Kupffer's  cells  132 
L 
Lacrimal  30 
Lamellar  bone  39 
Language  of anatomy  10 
Lanugo  179 
Large  arteries  105 
Lateral  13 
Lateral  border  15 
Lateral  flexion  16, 20 
Lateral  rotation  16, 20 
Leprosy  164,  169 
Leukopenia  135 
Ligamenta  flava  198 
Ligaments  198 
Light  bands  86 
Lineae  gravidarum  174 
Lithotomy  position  12 
Long  bones  32 
Long  plantar  ligament  200 
Loops  175 
Loose  connective  tissue  196 
Loose  packed  75 
Lower  motor  neuron  damage  168 
Lymph  capillaries  124 
Lymph  nodes  127 
Lymph  vessels  124 
Lymphadenitis  133 
Lymphangitis  133 
Lymphatic  channels  130 
258 • Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Lymphatic  follicle  127 
Lymphatic  system  123 
M 
Mband  86 
Macrophages  132 
Magnetic  resonance  imaging  211 
Malaria  135,  167 
Male  surface  72 
Malignant  27 
Malleolus  22 
Malleus  30 
Mandible  30 
Manubriosternal  joint  64 
Marfan's  syndrome  202 
Mass  miniature  208 
Mass  miniature  radiography  208 
Maxilla  30 
Medial  13 
Medial  border  15 
Medial  rotation  16 
Median  12 
Median  atlanto-axial  joint  66 
Median  or midsagittal  plane  12 
Medium  and small  arteries  105 
Medulla  130 
Medullary  cavity  40 
Melanin  173 
Melanocytes  173 
Melanoid  173 
Membrane  (dermal)  bones  36 
Membrano-cartilaginous  bones  36 
Menigocele  54 
Meningo-myelocele  54 
Meningocytes  132 
Metacarpals  30 
Metacarpophalangeal  joints  69 
Metaphysial  arteries  45 
Metaphysis  80 
Metastasis  28 
Metatarsals  30 
Microcirculatory  unit 116 
Microglia  145 Microglial  cells  132 
Midsagittal  plane  12 
Mole  189 
Monocytes  of blood  132 
Mononeuropathy  165 
Monoplegia  27 
Motor  point  95 
Motor  unit 95 
Multi-axial  72 
Multi-unit  type  96 
Multipennate  90 
Multipolar  142 
Muscle  fibre  86 
Muscle  spindles  94 
Muscular  spasm  98 
Myasthenia  gravis  99, 135 
Myelin  sheath  153 
Myelinated  152 
Myelinated  fibres  153 
Myelinated  or medullated  fibres  152 
Myocardial  ischaemia  100 
Myofibrils  86 
Myology  1 
N 
Nail bed 177 
Nail wall  177 
Nails  176 
Nasal  30 
Necrosis  26 
Nerve  plexuses  for limbs  150 
Nervi  nervorum  152 
Nervi  vascularis  107 
Nervorum  152 
Neuralgia  164 
Neurapraxia  163 
Neuroglia  144 
Neurolemmal  153 
Neurolemmal  sheath  154 
Neurology  1 
Neuron  139 
Neuropathic  (Charcot's)  joint  164 
Neuropathic  joint  82 
Neurotmesis  163 
Nodes  of Ranvier  153 
Nomina  anatomica  10 
Non-myelinated  152 
Non-myelinated  fibres  154 
Notch  22 
Nutrient  artery  43 
o 
Occipital  30 
Oedema  26 
Oligodendrocytes  145 
Ontogeny  3 
Opening  the mouth  19 
Opposition  of thumb  17 
Origin  83 
Ossification  29, 46 
Osteoarthritis  78 
Osteology  1 
Osteoma  29 
Osteomalacia  29, 55 
Osteomyelitis  29 
Osteoporosis  55 
Ovoid  73 
Ovoid  of motion  73 
Oxy haemoglobin  173 
P 
Palatine  30 
Palmar  15 
Palpable  arteries  107 
Palpation  2 
Panniculus  adiposus  182 
Papillary  layer  174 
Papillary  ridges  175 
Paraesthesia  27 
Paralysis  27, 98 
Paranasal  air sinuses  31 
Paraplegia  27 
Parasympathetic  nervous  system  158 
Parietal  30 
Parkinson's  disease  168 Patella  30 
Penetrating  power  206 
Percussion  2 
Perimysium  87 
Perineurium  147 
Peripheral  autonomic  nervous  139 
Peripheral  heart  112 
Peripheral  lymphoid  organs  127 
Peripheral  nerves  147 
Phalanges  30 
Phlebitis  118 
Photographic  effect  206 
Phylogeny  3 
Physical  anthropology  4 
Physiology  1 
Pigmentation  of skin 171 
Pivot  joint  64 
Plane  64 
Plantar  aponeuroses  185,  186 
Plantarflexion  of foot 18 
Pneumatic  bones  32 
Poliomyelitis  167 
Polyarthric  muscles  94 
Polymyositis  99 
Polyneuropathy  164 
Portal  circulation  103 
Posterior  13, 15 
Posterior  tibial  107 
Potential  arterial  anastomosis  113 
Precapillary  sphincter  105 
Pressure  epiphysis  41 
Pressure  lamellae  38 
Pressure  sores  189 
Prime  movers  97 
Pronation  16, 17 
Prone  position  10 
Protoplasmic  astrocytes  144 
Protraction  16, 19 
Proximal  13, 15 
Pseudo-unipolar  142 
Puberty  26 
Pulmonary  (lesser)  circulation  103 
Pyrexia  26 
260 • Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Q 
Quadriplegia  27 
R 
Radial  107 
Radiographic  and imaging  anatomy 
3 
Radiographic  views  207 
Radiography  2 
Radius  30 
Ramus  22 
Raphe  21, 201 
Raynaud's  phenomenon  119 
Referred  pain  161 
Reflex  arc 146 
Regeneration  163 
Regional  anatomy  1 
Replaced  hip joints  80 
Reservoir  (capacitance)  vessels  103 
Resistance  vessels  103 
Reticular  layer  174 
Reticulo-endothelial  system  131 
Retinacula  184,  193 
Retraction  16, 19 
Rheumatic  fever  77 
Rheumatic  fever  201 
Rheumatoid  arthritis  78, 201 
Ribs 30 
Rickets  53 
Right  lymphatic  duct  125 
Rolling  74 
Rostral  16 
Rotation  16, 60 
s 
Sacroiliac  66 
Sacrospinous  ligament  200 
Sacrotuberous  ligament  200 
Saddle  joint  64 
Sagittal  plane  12 
Sarcolemma  86 Sarcoma  27 
Sarcomere  86 
Scabies  190 
Scapula  30 
Schwann  cell 154 
Scleroderma  201 
Scleroderma  201 
Scurvy  54 
Sebaceous  cyst 190 
Sebaceous  glands  180 
Sebum  180 
Sellar  73 
Serotonin  143 
Sesamoid  bones  32 
Short  bones  32 
Shoulder  joint  71 
Shunts  103 
Simple  joint  60, 72 
Single-unit  type  96 
Sinus  25, 26 
Sinusoids  112 
Skeletal  muscles  83 
Skin incisions  190 
Slide  74 
Smallest  arteries  105 
Somatic  bones  37 
Somatic  muscles  83 
Special  movements  16 
Special  somatic  afferent  155 
Special  visceral  afferent  155 
Special  visceral  efferent  155 
Spheno-occipital  joint  64 
Sphenoid  30 
Spin 73 
Spina  bifida  occulta  54 
Spinal  ganglion  149 
Spinal  nerve  149 
Spinal  nerves  147 
Spiral  91 
Splanchnology  1 
Splenomegaly  135 
Spondylitis  78 
Stapes  30 
Index  I 261 
Sternoclavicularjoint  69 
Sternum  30 
Strap  like 88 
Strap  like with  tendinous 
intersections  88 
Stretch  reflexes  147 
Striated  muscles  83 
Striped  muscles  83 
Structure  of skin 173 
Styloid  process  22 
Subluxation  77 
Superficial  fascia  182 
Superior  13 
Superior  and inferior  radio-ulnar 
joints  66 
Superior  tibiofibular  66 
Supination  16, 17 
Supine  position  10 
Surface  anatomy  3 
Sutures  61 
Sweat  glands  179 
Swing  73 
Sympathetic  nervous  system  156 
Symphyses  64 
Symphysis  menti  64 
Symphysis  pubis  64 
Synapse  143 
Synarthrosis  58 
Synarthrosis  57 
Synchondrosis  63 
Syndesmology  57 
Syndesmosis  61 
Syndrome  27 
Synergists  97 
Synovial  fluid  75 
Synovial  joints  58 
Syringomyelia  165 
Syringomyelia  164 
Systemic  (greater)  circulation  103 
T 
T-Lymphocytes  133 Tabes  dorsalis  164 
Talocalcaneonavicular  joint  71 
Tarsals  30 
Tarsometatarsal  66 
Temporal  30 
Temporomandibular  joint  68 
Tendon  21 
Tendon  85 
Tension  lamellae  38 
Tension  lines  175 
Terminal  hair 179 
Terms  related  to body  movements  16 
Therapy  28 
Thermanaesthesia  27 
Thoracic  duct  125 
Thoroughfare  channels  115 
Thrombocytopenia  135 
Thrombosis  26, 117 
Thymus  127 
Tibia  30 
Tibial  collateral  ligament  199 
Tissue  culture  8 
Traction  epiphysis  41 
Translation  72 
Triangular  90 
Trochanter  22 
Trochlea  25 
Trophic  changes  164 
True ligaments  65 
Tumour  27 
Tunica  adventitia  106 
Tunica  intima  106 
Tunica  media  106 
Type  I (slow)  fibres  88 
Types  of fats 183 
U 
Ulcer  26 
Ulna  30 
Ultrasonograph  210 
Uniaxial  72 
Unipennate  90 
262 • Handbook  of General  Anatomy 
Unipolar  142 
Upper  motor  neuron  damage  168 
Varicose  veins  120 
Vasa vasorum  106,  125 
Veins  22, 102 
Vellus  179 
Venous  anastomosis  113 
Venous  valves  111 
Ventral  13, 15 
Ventral  ramus  149,  150 
Ventral  root 149 
Visceral  bones  37 
Vitiligo  192 Voluntary  muscles  83 
Vomer  30 
W 
Whorls  175 
Wolff's  law 38 
Woven  bone  39 
Wrist  joint  69 
X-rays  205 
Z 
Zygomatic  30 
B D Chaurasia's  Fourth  Edition 
Handbook  of GENERAL  ANATOMY 
This  handbook  aims  to meet  the  requirements  of medical  and  dental 
students  who  are  newly  admitted  to  colleges.  It thoroughly 
introduces  the  reader  to anatomic  terminology  along  with  various 
structures  which  constitute  the  human  body.  Since  teaching  of 
general  anatomy  lays  down  the  foundation  of the  entire  subject  of 
medicine  and  surgery,  this  handbook  has  been  written  in a short, 
simple  and  comprehensive  language.  The  text  has  been  classified 
into small  parts  making  it easier  for  the  students  to follow  and 
remember  the  text. 
The text  has  been  broadly  divided  into  ten  chapters.  Besides  the 
introductory  chapter,  the  other  chapters  are:  Skeleton,  Joints, 
Muscles,  Cardiovascular  System,  Lymphatic  System,  Nervous 
System,  Skin  and  Fasciae,  and  Connective  Tissue,  Ligaments  and 
Raphe.  A new  chapter  Principles  of Radiography  has  been  added  to 
introduce  radiologic  anatomy  to the  young  students.  Clinical 
anatomy  has  been  vividly  illustrated  through  colour  diagrams. 
This  edition  features  fresh,  simple,  coloured  diagrams  which 
extensively  illustrate  each  chapter.  The  text  has  been  revised  to 
supplement  these  for easy  learning.  The  appendix  on anatomical 
word  meanings  and  historic  names  makes  a rich  source  of 
information  that  is basic  to the study  of medicine. 
CBS 
CBS Publishers  & Distributors  Pvt. Ltd. 
4819/XI,  24 Ansari  Road,  Daryaganj,  New  Delhi  - 110 002 (India) 
E-mail: cbspubs@vsnl.com ; delhi@cbspd.com  • www.cbspd.com 
New  Delhi  • Bengaluru  • Pune  • Kochi  • Chennai 
